Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 



'>i^^, f^o^=o \ \,v^ J 




t 






I , 
I 



u 



't 

I 

4 



• • 



I 

I 



I 



I 



I 

4 



w 



t > 



\ 



t • 



J 



* . t 



\ 
t i 



I 



) 

1 
t 






k 
h 



. ■ 
• 1 



\ 



% 

f 
* 
1 
t 






■ 









lA i •. 







'P 



r n i ■ M . ^ 



SECRET DOCTRINE 



Artam Thbosopbical Prbss 
Ptoint Loniftf California 



THE SECRET DOCTRINE 



THE SYNTHESIS OF 
SCIENCE, RELIGION, AND PHILOSOPHY 



BY 



a P. BLAVATSKY 

Author of Ins UnveUed 



'There is no Religion Higher than Truih^ 



VOLUME I 

COSMOGENESIS 

SECTION U 



SECOND POINT LOMA EDITION 

THE ARYAN THEOSOPHICAL PRESS 

POINT LOMA. CALIFORNIA 

1917 






J/M^ 3i 19.2 



cc 



Entered according to Act of Congress in the year 1888^ by H. P. Blavatsky^ 
in the Office of the Librarian of Congress at Washington ^ D. C." 



9 Bebicate to all tB^nie W^nnofl^iisstsi, 

9n Cberp Cotttttrp, 

!3nb of Ctterp SUia, 

:fm tfiep caUeb it fortlb» onb for tijem tt toaie; recorbeb. 



BOOK I, PART II 



THE 



EVOLUTION OF SYMBOLISM 



IN ITS APPROXIMATE ORDER 



EXPLANATORY SECTIONS 



ii 



^■- -V'irjrx^it MJ^ jifiosLt^sts 



iJ^ Xtiman 



y/^ r'n'jr.accjtiL • ,jw^#jr3 jlvz, Zmvzsi rsiu.Lsr 






* *^XtfA^ IZMfA^ JU 



> — T** /;.;:ciL» *^«rTr xj::. rrj j£-r?2$ 



> 



^ 7ju 1C%j^aj^£ Eta 



V'#i ■ 7«Jt I/^ ri AJ>:f ^'i-^HTJ sr 



V J.'i 7j<e I>/y ,t Ai A Vifr.TaBAt Si 

/X /-flt',* I^'.jfvt 

X- Tirrjt A5fi> Sar«5fT A3fD Okoooole Wc«ship ... 403 

XI iJtuon tn Vtv% IsYtMSfJs 411 

XIJ T«JBrx»jrr or the Creative Goos 424 

XIH -The Sevew CirEATioxs 445 

XIV- The Fo';t Elements of the Axciexts 460 

XV ^>W KwAK-ShI YlJf AND KWAN-YlK 470 



BOOK I — PART II 
(SECRET DOCTRINE) 

§1 
SYMBOLISM AND IDEOGRAPHS 

A symbol is ever, to him who has eyes for it, 
some dimmer or clearer revelation of the God-like. 
Through all there glimmers something of a divine 
idea; nay, the highest ensign that men ever met and 
embraced under, the cross itself, had no meaning, save 
an accidental extrinsic one. Cabi«yus 

The study of the hidden meaning in every religious and profane 
legend, of whatsoever nation, large or small — pre-eminently the tradi- 
tions of the East — has occupied the greater portion of the present 
writer's life. She is one of those who feel convinced that no mytho- 
logical story, no traditional event in the folk-lore of a people has ever 
been, at any time, pure fiction, but that every one of such narratives 
has an actual, historical lining to it. In this the writer disagrees with 
those symbologists, however great their reputation, who find in every 
myth nothing save additional proofs of the superstitious bent of mind 
of the ancients, and believe that all m3rthologies sprang from and are 
built upon solar myths. Such superficial thinkers were admirably dis- 
posed of by Mr. Gerald Massey, the poet and Eg)rptolopst, in a lecture 
on " Luniolatry, Ancient and Modem." His pointed criticism is worthy 
of reproduction in this part of this work, as it echoes so well our own 
feelings, expressed openly so far back as 1875, when "Isis Unveiled " 
was written. 

For thirty years past Professor Max Mtiller has been teaching in his books 
and lectures, in the Times and various magazines, from the platform of the 
Ro3ral Institution, the pulpit of Westminster Abbey, and his chair at Oxford, 
that mythology is a disease of language, and that the ancient symbolism was 
a result of something like a primitive aberration. 

"We know," says Renouf, echoing Max Miiller, in his Hibbert lectures, "we 
know that mythology is the disease which springs up at a peculiar stage of 
human culture/' Such is the shallow explanation of the non-evolutionists, and 
such explanations are still accepted by the British public, that gets its think- 



304 THE SECRET XX)CTRINE 

ing done by proxy. Professor Max Muller, Cox, Gubematis, and other pro- 
pounders of the Solar Mythos, have portrayed the primitive myth-maker for us 
as a sort of Germanized-Hindii metaphysician, projecting his own shadow on 
a mental mist, and talking ingeniously concerning smoke, or, at least, cloud; 
the sky overhead becoming like the dome of dreamland, scribbled oyer with the 
imagery of aboriginal nightmares 1 They conceive the early man in their own 
likeness, and look upon him as perversely prone to self -mystification, or, as 
Fontenelle has it, "subject to beholding things that are not there." They have 
misrepresented primitive or archaic man as having been idiotically misled from 
the first by an active but untutored imagination into believing all sorts of 
fallacies, which were directly and constantly contradicted by his own daily 
experience; a fool of fancy in the midst of those grim realities that were grind- 
ing his experience into him, like the grinding icebergs making their imprints 
upon the rocks submerged beneath the sea. It remains to be said, and will one 
day be acknowledged, that these accepted teachers have been no nearer to 
the beginnings of mythology and language than Bums' poet Willie had been 
near to Pegasus. My reply is, 'Tis but a dream of the metaphysical theorist 
that mythology was a disease of language, or of anything else except his own 
brain. The origin and meaning of mythology have been missed altogether 
by these solarites and weather-mongers I Mythology was a primitive mode of 
thinking the early thought It was founded on natural facts, and is still verifi- 
able in phenomena. There is nothing insane, nothing irrational in it, when 
considered in the light of evolution, and when its mode of expression by sign- 
language is thoroughly understood. The insanity lies in mistaking it for 
human history or Divine Revelation."* Mythology is the repository of man's 
most ancient science, and what concerns us chiefly is this — when truly inter- 
preted once more, it is destined to be the death of those false theologies to 
which it has unwittingly given birth.*** In modem phraseology a statement is 
sometimes said to be mythical in proportion to its being untme; but the 
ancient mythology was not a system or mode of falsifying in that sense. Its 
fables were the means of conveying facts; they were neither forgeries nor 
fictions. . . . For example, when the Egyptians portrayed the moon as a Cat, 
they were not ignorant enough to suppose that the moon was a cat; nor did 
their wandering fancies see any likeness in the moon to a cat; nor was a cat- 
myth any mere expansion of verbal metaphor; nor had they any intention of 
making puzzles or riddles. . . . They had observed the simple fact that the 
cat saw in the dark, and that her eyes became full-orbed, and grew most 
luminous by night The moon was the seer by night in heaven, and the cat 
was its equivalent on the earth; and so the familiar cat was adopted as a repre- 
sentative, a natural sign, a living pictograph of the lunar orb. . . . And so it 
followed that the sun which saw down in the under-world at night could also 
be called the cat, as it was, because it also saw in the dark. The name of the 

379. At far as dMn4 rtv^loHon it con- 380. When the " falte theologiet*' dit- 

cerned, we agree. Not to with regard to appear, then true prehittoric realitiet will be 

** humtan history," . . . For there it "hit- found, contained etpecially in the mythology 

tory ** in mott of the allegoriet and " mytht " of the Aryant — ancient Hindfit, and even 

of India, and erenta, real actual erenta, are the pre-Homeric Hellenea. 
concealed under them. 



EMBLEM AND SYMBOL DIFFER 30S 

cat in Egyptian is mam, which denotes the seer, from mam, to see. One writer 
on mythology asserts that the Egyptians "imagined a great cat bdiind the 
smi which is the pupil of the cat's eye." But this imagining is all modem. 
It is the Mullerite stock in trade. The moon as cat was the eye of the sun, 
becoMse it refected the solar tight, and because the eye gives back the image in 
its mirror. In the form of the goddess Pasht, the cat keeps watch for the sun, 
with her paw holding down and bruising the head of the serpent of darkness, 
called his eternal enemy. . . . 

This is a very correct exposition of the lunar-mythos from its astro- 
nomical aspect. Selenc^raphy, however, is the least esoteric of the 
divisions of lunar Symbolc^jy. To master thoroughly — if one is per- 
mitted to a)in a new word — Selenognosis, one must become proficient 
in more than its astronomical meaning. The nKK>n {vide § ix, " Deus 
Lunus ") is intimately related to the Earth, as shown in Stanza VI of 
Book I, and is more directly concerned with all the mysteries of our 
globe than is even Venus-Ludfer, the occult sister and alter^go of 
the Earth. 

The untiring researches of Western, and especially German, symbolo- 
gists, during the last and the present centuries, have brought every 
Occultist and most unprejudiced persons to see that without the help of 
sjrmbolpgy (with its seven departments, of which the modems know 
nothing) no ancient Scripture can ever be correctly understood. Sym- 
bology must be studied from every one of its aspects, for each nation 
had its own peculiar methods of expression. In short, no Egyptian 
papyrus, no Indian olla, no Assyrian tile, or Hebrew scroll, should be 
read and accepted literally. 

This every scholar now knows. The able lectures of Mr. G. Massey 
alone are sufficient in themselves to convince any fair-minded Christian 
that to accept the dead-letter of the Bible is equivalent to falling into a 
grosser error and superstition than any hitherto evolved by the brain 
of the savage South Sea Islander. But the point to which even the 
most truth-loving and truth-searching Orientalists — whether Aryanists 
or Egyptologists — seem to remain blind, is the fact that every symbol 
in papyrus or olla is a many-faced diamond, each of whose facets not 
merely bears several interpretations, but relates likewise to several 
sciences. This is instanced in the just quoted interpretation of the 
moon symbolized by the cat — an example of sidereo-terrestrial imagery ; 
the moon bearing many other meanings besides this with other nations. 

As a learned Mason and Theosophist, the late Mr. Kenneth Macken- 
zie, has shown in his Royal Masonic Cyclopaedia, there is a great differ- 
ence between emblem and symbol. The former "comprises a larger 
series of thoughts than a symbol, which may be said rather to illustrate 
some single special idea." Hence, the symbols (say lunar, or solar) of 
several countries, each illustrating such a special idea, or series of ideas, 



306 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

form collectively an esoteric emblem. The latter is " a concrete visible 
picture or sign representing principles, or a series of principles, recog- 
nizable by those who have received certain instructions" (initiates). 
To put it still plainer, an emblem is usually a series of graphic pictures 
viewed and explained allegorically, and unfolding an idea in panoramic 
views, one after the other. Thus the Puranas are written emblems. 
So are the Mosaic and Christian Testaments, or the Bible, and, all 
other exoteric Scriptures. As the same authority shows: — 

All esoteric Societies have made use of emblems and symbols, such as the 
Pythagorean Society, the Eleusinian, the Hermetic Brethren of Egypt, the 
Rosicrucians, and the Freemasons. Many of these emblems it is not proper 
to divulge to the general eye, and a very minute difference may make the emblem 
or symbol differ widely in its meaning. The magical sigillae, being founded on 
certain principles of numbers, partake of this character, and although mon- 
strous or ridiculous in the eyes of the uninstructed, convey a whole body of 
doctrine to those who have been trained to recognize them. 

The above enurnerated societies are all comparatively modem, none 
dating back earlier than the middle ages. How much more proper, then, 
that the students of the oldest Archaic School should be careful not to 
divulge secrets of far more importance to humanity (in the sense of 
being dangerous in the hands of the latter) than any of the so-called 
" Masonic Secrets," which have now become, as the French say, those 
of " Polichinelle ! " But this restriction can apply only to the psycho- 
logical or rather psycho-physiological and Cosmical significance of sym- 
bol and emblem, and even to that only partially. An adept must refuse 
to impart the conditions and means that lead to a correlation of elements, 
whether psychic or physical, that may produce a hurtful result as well as 
a beneficent one. But he is ever ready to impart to the earnest student 
the secret of the ancient thought in anything that regards history con- 
cealed under mythological symbolism, and thus to furnish a few more 
land-marks towards a retrospective view of the past, as containing use- 
ful information with regard to the origin of man, the evolution of the 
races and geognosy; yet it is the crying complaint today, not only 
among Theosophists, but also among the few profane interested in the 
subject, " Why do not the adepts reveal that which they know ? " To 
this, one might answer, " Why should they, since one knows beforehand 
that no man of science will accept, even as a hypothesis, let alone as a 
theory or axiom, the facts imparted. Have you so much as accepted or 
believed in the A B C of the Occult philosophy contained in the Theo- 
sophist, "Esoteric Buddhism," and other works and periodicals? Hzs 
not even the little which was given, been ridiculed and derided, and 
made to face the " animal " and " ape theory " of Huxley-Haeckel, on 
one hand, and the rib of Adam and the apple on the other ? ** Notwith- 
standing such an unenviable prospect, a mass of facts is given in the 



MAGIC POTENCY OF SOUND 307 

present work. And now the origin of man, the evolution of the globe 
and the races, human and animal, are as fully treated here as the 
writer is able to treat them. 

The proofs brought forward in corroboration of the old teachings are 
scattered widely throughout the old scriptures of ancient civilizations. 
The Puranas, the Zendavesta, and the old classics are full of them; 
but no one has ever gone to the trouble of collecting and collating to- 
gether those facts. The reason for this is, that all such events were 
recorded symbolically ; and that the best scholars, the most acute minds, 
among our Aryanists and Egyptologists, have been too often darkened 
by one or another preconception; still oftener, by one-sided views of 
the secret meaning. Yet even a parable is a spoken symbol: a fiction 
or a fable, as some think; an allegorical representation, we say, of 
life-realities, events and facts. And, as a moral was ever drawn from 
a parable, that moral being an actual truth and fact in human life, 
so a historical, real event was deduced — by those versed in the hier- 
atic sciences — from certain emblems and symbols recorded in the 
ancient archives of the temples. The religious and esoteric history of 
every nation was embedded in symbols; it was never expressed in 
so many words. All the thoughts and emotions, all the learning and 
knowledge, revealed and acquired, of the early races, found their pic- 
torial expression in allegory and parable. Why? Because the spoken 
word has a potency unknown to, unsuspected and disbelieved in, by the 
modem " sages." Because sound and rhythm are closely related to the 
four Elements of the Ancients ; and because such or another vibration 
in the air is sure to awaken corresponding powers, union with which 
produces good or bad results, as the case may be. No student was ever 
allowed to recite historical, religious, or any real events in so many un- 
mistakable words, lest the powers connected with the event should be 
once more attracted. Such events were narrated only during the Initia- 
tion, and every student had to record them in corresponding symbols, 
drawn out of his own mind and examined later by his master, before 
they were finally accepted. Thus was created in time the Chinese Al- 
phabet, as, before that, the hieratic symbols were fixed upon in old 
Egypt. In the Chinese language, the alphabet of which may be read 
in any language,"^ and which is only a little less ancient than the Eg)rp- 
tian alphabet of Thoth, every word had its corresponding symbol con- 
veying the word needed in a pictorial form. The language possesses 
many thousands of such symbol letters, or logograms, each meaning a 
whole word; for letters proper, or an alphabet, do not exist in the 

381. Thus, a Japanese who does not un- of the former, will communicate in writing 
der«tand one word of Chinese, meeting with with him, and they will understand each other 
a Chinaman who has never heard the language perfectly — because the writing is symbolical. 






a 



UNIVL '^ilTY 
Jhh 3i 19J2 



** Entered according to Act of Congress in the year 1888y by H. P. Blavatsky^ 
in the Office of the Librarian of Congress at ff^ashington^ D. C" 



9 Bettcate to all Kwt (B^otfoptuctt, 

in Cberp ComtxPf 

lanii of €berp Slate, 

:f or ttep caKdi tt fortt), anti for tfiem tt tuaK retorbeln. 



BOOK I, PART II 



THE 



EVOLUTION OF SYMBOLISM 



IN ITS APPROXIMATE ORDER 



EXPLANATORY SECTIONS 



CONTENTS 



88 

I — Symbousm and Ideographs 

II — Mystery Language 

Ill — Primordiai, Substance and Divine Thought 

IV — Chaos, Theos, Kosmos 

V— The Hidden Deity and its Gi*yphs ... 

VI — ^The Mundane Egg 

VII — ^The Days and Nights of Brahma ... 
VIII — ^The Lotus as a Universai, Symbol ... 

IX — Deus Lunus 

X — ^Tree and Serpent and Crocodiw Worship 

XI — Demon est Deus Inversus 

XII — ^Theogony of the Creative Gods 

XIII — The Seven Creations 

XIV — ^The Four Elements of the Ancients 
XV — On Kwan-Shi Yin and Kwan-Yin ... 



PAGE 

303 

310 

325 

342 

349 

359 

368 

379 

386 

403 

411 

424 

445 

460 

470 



BOOK I — PART II 
(SECRET DOCTRINE) 

§1 
SYMBOLISM AND IDEOGRAPHS 

A symbol is ever, to him who has eyes for it, 
some dimmer or clearer revelation of the God-like. 
Through all there glimmers something of a divine 
idea; nay, the highest ensign that men ever met and 
embraced under, the cross itself, had no meaning, save 
an accidental extrinsic one. Carlyis 

The study of the hidden meaning in every religious and profane 
legend, of whatsoever nation, large or small — pre-eminently the tradi- 
tions of the East — has occupied the greater portion of the present 
writer's life. She is one of those who feel convinced that no mytho- 
logical story, no traditional event in the folk-lore of a people has ever 
been, at any time, pure fiction, but that every one of such narratives 
has an actual, historical lining to it. In this the writer disagrees with 
those symbologists, however great their reputation, who find in every 
myth nothing save additional proofs of the superstitious bent of mind 
of the ancients, and believe that all mythologies sprang from and are 
built upon solar myths. Such superficial thinkers were admirably dis- 
posed of by Mr. Gerald Massey, the poet and Egyptologist, in a lecture 
on " Luniolatry, Ancient and Modem." His pointed criticism is worthy 
of reproduction in this part of this work, as it echoes so well our own 
feelings, expressed openly so far back as 1875, when "Isis Unveiled" 
was written. 

For thirty years past Professor Max Mtiller has been teaching in his books 
and lectures, in the Times and various magazines, from the platform of the 
Royal Institution, the pulpit of Westminster Abbey, and his chair at Oxford, 
that mythology is a disease of language, and that the ancient symbolism was 
a result of something like a primitive aberration. 

"We know," says Renouf, echoing Max Miiller, in his Hibbert lectures, "we 
know that mythology is the disease which springs up at a peculiar stage of 
human culture." Such is the shallow explanation of the non-evolutionists, and 
such explanations are still accepted by the British public, that gets its think- 



314 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

Mr. Petrie seems to deny them, and to have made short work alto- 
gether of Piazzi Smyth's calculations in their Biblical connexion. So 
does Mr. Proctor, the champion " Coincidentalist " for many years 
past in every question of ancient arts and sciences. Speaking of " the 
multitude of relations independent of the Pyramid, which have turned 
up while the Pyramidalists have been endeavoring to connect the 
pyramid with the solar system . . . these coincidences," he says, 

are altogether more curious than any coincidence between the Pyramid and 
astronomical numbers: the former are as close and remarkable as they are 
real [ue., those "coincidences" that would remain if even the pyramid had no 
existence] ; the latter which are only imaginary [ ?] have only been established 
by the process which schoolboys call " fudging," and now new measures have 
left the work to be done all over again."* 

To this Mr. Staniland Wake justly observes in his work on The 
Origin and Significance of the Great Pyramid.^^* 

They must, however, have been more than mere coincidences, if the builders 
of the Pyramid had the astronomical knowledge displayed in its perfect orienta- 
tion and in its other admitted astronomical features. 

They had it; and it is on this "knowledge" that the program of 
the MYSTERIES and of the series of Initiations was based: thence, the 
construction of the Pyramids, the everlasting record and the indestruct- 
ible symbol of these Mysteries and Initiations on Earth, as the courses 
of the stars are in Heaven. The cycle of Initiation was a reproduction 
in miniature of that great series of Cosmic changes to which astronom- 
ers have given the name of tropical or sidereal year. Just as, at the 
close of the cycle of the sidereal year (25,868 years), the heavenly 
bodies return to the same relative positions as they occupied at its outset, 
so at the close of the cycle of Initiation the inner man has regained 
the pristine state of divine purity and knowledge from which he set 
out on his cycle of terrestrial incarnation. 

Moses, an Initiate into the Egyptian Mystagogy, based the religious 
mysteries of the new nation which he created, upon the same abstract 
formula derived from this sidereal cycle, which he symbolized under the 
form and measurements of the tabernacle, that he is supposed to have 
constructed in the wilderness. On these data, the later Jewish High 
Priests constructed the allegory of Solomon's Temple — a building 
which never had a real existence, any more than had King Solomon 
himself, who is simply, and as much a solar myth as is the still later 
Hiram Abif, of the IVIasons, as Ragon has well demonstrated. Thus, 
if the measurements of this allegorical temple, the symbol of the cycle of 

383. Pctric*s Utter to Tkt Academy, Dec 17, 1881. 384. London, 1882. 



PIAZZI SMYTH AND PETRIE DISAGREE 315 

Initiation, coincide with those of the Great Pyramid, it is due to the fact 
that the former were derived from the latter through the Tabernacle 
of Moses. 

That our author has undeniably discovered one and even two of fhe 
keys is fully demonstrated in the work just quoted. One has but to read 
it to feel a growing conviction that the hidden meaning of the allegories 
and parables of both Testaments is now unveiled. But that he owes 
this discovery far more to his own genius than to Parker and Piazzi 
Smyth, is as certain, if not more so. For, as just shown, whether the 
measures of the great Pyramid taken and adopted as the correct ones 
by the Biblical " Pyramidalists " are beyond suspicion, is not so sure. 
A proof of this is the work called The Pyramids and Temples of 
Giseh, by Mr. F. Petrie, besides other works written quite recently 
to oppose the said calculations, which were called biased. We gather 
that nearly every one of Piazzi Smyth's measurements differs from the 
later and more carefully made measurements of Mr. Petrie, who 
concludes the Introduction to his work with this sentence: 

As to the results of the whole investigation, perhaps many theorists will 
agree with an American who was a warm believer in Pyramid theories when he 
came to Gizeh. I had the pleasure of his company there for a couple of days, 
and at our last meal together he said to me in a saddened tone: — "Well sir! 
I feel as if I had been to a funeral. By all means let the old theories have a 
decent burial, though we should take care that in our haste none of the wounded 
ones are buried alive." 

As regards the late J. Parker's calculation in general, and his third 
proposition especially, we have consulted some eminent mathematicians, 
and this is the substance of what they say: 

Parker's reasoning rests on sentimental, rather than mathematical, 
considerations, and is logically inconclusive. 

Proposition III, namely, that — 

The circle is the natural basis or beginning of all area, and the square being 
made so in mathematical science, is artificial and arbitrary — 

— is an illustration of an arbitrary proposition, and cannot safely be 
relied upon in mathematical reasoning. The same observation applies, 
even more strongly, to Proposition VII, which states that: 

Because the circle is the primary shape in nature, and hence the basis of 
area; and because the circle is measured by, and is equal to the square only in 
ratio of half its circumference by the radius, therefore, circumference and radius, 
and not the square of diameter, are the only natural and legitimate elements 
of area, by which all regular shapes are made equal to the square, and equal to 
the circle. 

Proposition IX is a remarkable example of faulty reasoning, and it is 
the one on which Mr. Parker's Quadrature mainly rests. Here it is : — 



316 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

The circle and the equilateral triangle are opposite to one another in all 
the elements of their construction, and hence the fractional diameter of one 
circle, which is equal to the diameter of one square, is in the opposite duplicate 
ratio to the diameter of an equilateral triangle whose area is one, etc, etc 

Granting, for the sake of argument, that a triangle can be said to 
have a radius in the sense in which we speak of the radius of a circle, — 
for what Parker calls the radius of the triangle is the radius of a circle 
inscribed in the triangle and therefore not the radius of the triangle at 
all, — and granting for the moment the other fanciful and mathematical 
propositions united in his premisses, why must we conclude that if the 
triangle and circle are opposite in all the elements of their construction, 
the diameter of any defined circle is in the opposite duplicate ratio of 
the diameter of any given equivalent triangle? What necessary con- 
nexion is there between the premisses and the conclusion? The reas- 
oning is of a kind not known in geometry, and would not be accepted by 
strict mathematicians. 

Whether the Archaic esoteric system originated the British inch or 
not, is of little consequence, however, to the strict and true metaphysi- 
cian. Nor does Mr. Ralston Skinner's esoteric reading of the Bible 
become incorrect, merely because the measurements of the P)rramid 
will not be found to agree with those of Solomon's temple, the ark of 
Noah, etc. ; or because Mr. Parker's Quadrature of the Circle is reject- 
ed by mathematicians. For Mr. Skinner's reading depends first of all 
on the Kabalistic methods and the Rabbinical value of the Hebrew let- 
ters. But it is extremely important to ascertain whether the measures 
used in the evolution and building of the Aryan symbolic religion, in the 
construction of their temples, the figures given in the Puranas, and 
especially in their chronology, their astronomical symbols, the duration 
of the cycles, and other computations, were, or were not, the same as 
those used in the Biblical measurements and glyphs. For this will 
prove that the Jews, unless they took their sacred cubit and measure- 
ments from the Egyptians (Moses being an initiate of the Priests) 
must have got those notions from India. At any rate they passed them 
to the early Christians. Hence, it is the Occultists and Kabalists 
who are the "true" heirs to the knowledge, or the secret wisdom 
which is still found in the Bible; for they alone now tmderstand its 
real meaning, whereas profane Jews and Christians cling to the husks 
and dead letter thereof. That it is the system of measures which led 
to the invention of the God-names Elohim and Jehovah, and their 
adaptation to phallicism, and that Jehovah is a not very flattered 
copy of Osiris, is now demonstrated by the author of the Source of 
Measures. But the latter and Mr. Piazzi Smyth both seem to labor 
under the impression that (a) the priority of the system belongs to the 



TRUTH MUST PREVAII. AT I^AST 



317 



Israelites, the Hebrew language being the divine language, and that 
(b) this universal language belongs to direct revelation! 

The latter hypothesis is correct only in the sense shown in the last 
paragraph of the preceding § ; but we have yet to agree as to the nature 
and character of the divine " Revealer." With regard to priority, this, 
to the profane, will of course depend on (a) the internal and external 
evidence of the revelation, and (fc) on each scholar's individual precon- 
ception. This, however, cannot prevent either the theistic Kabalist, 
or the Pantheistic Occultist, from believing each in his way; neither 
of the two convincing the other. The data furnished by history are 
too meager and unsatisfactory for either of them to prove to the sceptic 
which of them is right. 

On the other hand, the proofs afforded by tradition are too constantly 
rejected for us to hope to settle the question in our present age. Mean- 
while, materialistic science will be laughing impartially at both Kabalr 
ists and Occultists. But the said vexed question of priority once laid 
aside. Science, in its departments of philology and comparative religion, 
will find itself finally taken to task, and be compelled to admit the com- 
mon claim.*** Its greatest scholars, instead of pooh-poohing that sup- 



ass. One by one the claims become ad- 
mitted, as one Scientitt after another is com- 
pelled to recognitt the facts given out from 
the S^crgt Doctrint — though he rarely, if 
ever, recognizes that he has been anticipated 
in his sutements. Thus, in the pslmy days 
of Mr. Piaazi Smyth's authority on the Pyra- 
mid of Gizeh, his theory was, that the por- 
phyry sarcophagus of the King's Chamber 
" is the unU of mtaturt for the two most 
enlightened nations of the earth, England and 
America," and waa no better than a "com 
bin." This waa vehemently denied by us 
in Isis UnveiUd just published at that time. 
Then the New York press arose in arms 
(the "Sun*' and the "World" chiefly) 
against our presuming to correct or find fault 
with such a star of learning. On p. 519, 
VoL I, we had said, that Herodotus when 
treating of that Pjrramid "might have added 
that externally it symbolized tht creaHvt 
principU of Nature, and illustrated also the 
primciplts of geometry, mathematics, astrology, 
amd astronomy. Internally, it was a majestk 
fane, in whose somber recesses were per- 
formed the mysteries, and whose wslls hsd 
often witnessed the initiation-scenes of mem- 



bers of the royal family. The porphyry sar- 
cophagus, which Professor Piazzi Smyth, 
Astronomer Royal of Scotland, degrades into 
a corn-bin, was the baptismal font, upon 
emerging from which the neophyte was 
' bom again ' and became an adept." 

Our sUtement was Isughed st in those 
days. We were accused of having got our 
ideas from the "craze" of Shaw, an English 
writer who had maintained that the Sar^ 
cophagus had been used for the celebration 
of the Mysteries of Osiris; (we had never 
heard of that writer I). And now, six or 
seven years later, this is what Mr. Staniland 
Wake writes on p. 93 of his paper, on 
The Origin and Significance of the Great 
Pyramid. 

"The so-called King's Chamber, of which 
an enthusiastic pyramidist says, ' The polished 
walls, fine materials, grand proportions, and 
exalted place, eloquently tell of glories yet 
to come'— if not, 'the chamber of perfections' 
of Cbtopn* tomb, was probably the place to 
which the initiant was admitted after he had 
passed through the narrow upward passage and 
the grand gallery, with its lowly termination, 
which gradually prepared him for the final 



318 



THE SECRET DOCTRINE 



posed " farrago of absurd fiction and superstitions," as the Brahmanical 
literature is generally termed, will endeavor to learn the symbolical uni- 
versal language with its numerical and geometrical keys. But here again 
they will hardly be successful if they share the belief that the Jewish 
Kabalistic system contains the key to the whole mystery: for, it does 
not. Nor does any other Scripture at present possess it in its entirety, 
for even the Vedas are not complete. Every old religion is but a chap- 
ter or two of the entire volume of archaic primeval mysteries — Eastern 
Occultism alone being able to boast that it is in possession of the full 
secret, with its seven keys. Comparisons will be instituted, and as much 
as possible will be explained in this work — the rest is left to the stu- 
dent's personal intuition. For in saying that Eastern Occultism has the 
secret, it is not as if a " complete " or even an approximate knowledge 
was claimed by the writer, which would be absurd. What I know, I give 
out; that which I cannot explain, the student must find out for himself. 

But while supposing that the whole cycle of the universal mystery 
language will not be mastered for whole centuries to come, even that 
which has been hitherto discovered in the Bible by some scholars is quite 
sufficient to demonstrate the claim — mathematically. Judaism having 
availed itself of two keys out of the seven, and these two keys having 
been now rediscovered, it becomes no longer a matter of individual 
speculation and hypothesis, least of all of " coincidence," but one of a 
correct reading of the Bible texts, as anyone acquainted with arithmetic 
reads and verifies an addition or total."* A few years longer and this 
system will kill the dead letter of the Bible, as it will that of all the other 
exoteric faiths, by showing the dogmas in their real, naked meaning. 

And then this undeniable meaning, however incomplete, will unveil 
the mystei;y of Being, besides changing entirely the modem scientific 
systems of Anthropology, Ethnology and especially that of Chronology. 
The element of Phallicism, found in every God-name and narrative in the 
Old (and to some degree in the New) Testament, may also in time con- 
siderably change modem materialistic views in Biology and Physiology. 

Divested of their modem repulsive crudeness, such views of nature 
and man, on the authority of the celestial bodies and their mysteries, 



sU»t0 of the SACRED MYSTBRIES." Hid 
Mr. StaniUnd Wmke been a Theoaophict, be 
miffat hare added that the narrow upward 
passage leading to the King's chamber had 
a '^narrow gate** indeed; the same "strait 
gate" which " leadetfa unto life,'* or the new 
spiritaal re<bkth alluded to by Jesus in 
Matthew Tii 13 #1 seq.; and that it is this 



gate in the Initiation temple, that the writer 
who recorded the words alleged to have been 
spoken by an Initiate, was thinking of. 

386. All we have said in Isis is now found 
corroborated in the Egyptian Mystery; or 
The Source of Measures, by those readings 
of the Bible with the numerical and 
metrical keys thereto. 



MOSES COPIED FROM SARCON 



319 



will unveil the evolutions of the human mind and show how natural 
was such a course of thought. The so-called phallic symbols have 
become offensive only because of the element of materiality and ani- 
mality in them. As they originated with the archaic races, which, 
issuing to their personal knowledge from an androg)me ancestry, were 
the first phenomenal manifestations in their own sight of the separation 
of sexes and the ensuing mystery of creating in their turn — such s)rm- 
bols were but natural. If later races have degraded them, especially the 
" chosen people," this does not affect the origin of those symbols. The 
little Semitic tribe — one of the smallest branchlets from the comming- 
ling of the 4th and Sth sub-races (the Mongolo-Turanian and the Indo- 
European, so-called, after the sinking of the great Continent) — could 
only accept its symbology in the spirit which was given to it by the 
nations from which it was derived. Perchance, in the Mosaic begin- 
nings, that s)rmbology was not as crude as it became later under the 
handling of Ezra, who remodeled the whole Pentateuch. For the glyph 
of Pharaoh's daughter (the woman), the Nile (the Great Deep and 
Water), and the baby-boy found floating therein in the ark of rushes, 
has not been primarily composed for, or by, Moses. It has been found 
anticipated in the Babylonian fragments on the tiles, in the story of King 
Sargon,"^ who lived far earlier than Moses. Now, what is the logical 
inference? Most assuredly that which gives us the right to say that 
the story told of Moses by Ezra had been learned by him while at 



387. On page 224 of Assyrian Discoveries 
Mr. George Smith says: '* In the palace of 
Sennacherib at Kuyunjik I found another 
fragment of the curious history of Sargon. 
. . . published in my translation in the 
Transactions of the Society of Biblical Ar- 
chaeology, VoL I, Part I. p. 46." The 
capital of Sargon, the Babylonian Moses, 
" was the great city of Agadi, called by 
the Semites Alckad — mentioned in Genesis 
as the capital of Nimrod." {Gen. x. 10.) 
. . . "Akkad lay near the City of Sippara 
on the Euphrates and North of Babylon.*' 
(See Jsis, Vol. II, p. 442-3.) Another 
strange coincidence is found in the fact that 
the name of the neighboring above-mentioned 
City of Sippara is the same as the name of 
the vife of Moses — Zipporah (Bxodus ii). 
Of course the story is a clever addition by 
Exra, who could not be ignorant of it. This 
curious story is found on fragments of tab* 
lets from Kuyunjilc, and reads as follows: — 

1. Sargina, the powerful king, the king of 
Akkad am L 



2. My mother was a princess, my father 
I did not know; a brother of my father 
ruled over the country. 

3. In the city of Azupiranu, which is by 
the side of the River Euphrates. 

4. My mother, the princess, conceived me; 
in difficulty she brought -me forth. 

5. She placed me in an ark of rushes, 
with bitumen my exit she sealed up. 

6. She launched me in the river, which 
did not drown me. 

7. The river carried me, to Akld the water- 
carrier it brought me. 

8. Akld, the water-carrier, in tenderness of 
bowels, lifted me, etc., etc 

Atid now Bxodus (ii): "And when she 
(Moses* mother) could not longer hide him, 
she took for him an ark of bulrushes, and 
daubed it with slime and with pitch, and 
put the child therein, and she laid it in the 
flags by the river's brink." 

"The story," says Mr. G. Smith (in 
Chaldean Account of Genesis, p. 300) "is 
supposed to have happened about 1600 b. c. 



320 



THE SECRET DOCTRINE 



Babylon, and that he applied the allegory told of Sargon to the Jewish 
lawgiver. In short, that Exodus was never written by Moses, but re- 
fabricated from old materials by Ezra. 

And if so, then why should not other symbols and glyphs far more 
crude in their phallic element have been added by this adept in the 
later Chaldaean and Sabaean phallic worship? We are taught that the 
primeval faith of the Israelites was quite different from that which was 
developed centuries later by the Talmudists, and before them by David 
and Hezekiah. 

All this, notwithstanding the exoteric element, as now found in the 
two Testaments, is quite sufficient to class the Bible among esoteric 
works, and to connect its secret system with Indian, Chaldaean, and 
Egyptian symbolism. The whole cycle of biblical glyphs and numbers 
as suggested by astronomical observations — astronomy and theology 
being closely connected — is found in Indian exoteric, as well as eso- 
teric, systems. These figures and their symbols, the signs of the Zodiac, 
the planets, their aspects and nodes — the last term having now passed 
even into our modem botany to distinguish male and female plants (the 
unisexual, polygamous, monoecious, dioecious, etc., etc.) — are known 
in astronomy as sextUes, quartUes and so on, and have been used for 
ages and aeons by the archaic nations, and in one sense have the same 
meaning as the Hebrew numerals. The earliest forms of elementary 
geometry must have certainly been suggested by the observation of the 
heavenly bodies and their groupings. Hence the most archaic symbols 
in Eastern Esotericism are a circle, a point, a triangle, a plane, a cube, 
a pentacle, and a hexagon, and plane figures with various sides and 
angles. This shows the knowledge and use of geometrical symbology 
to be as old as the world. 

Starting from this, it becomes easy to understand how nature herself 
could have taught primeval mankind, even without the help of its 
divine instructors, the first principles of a numerical and geometrical 
S)rmbol language.'** Hence one finds numbers and figures used as an 



rmthcr earlier than the sttppoaed age of Motes, 
and as we know that the fame of Sargon 
reached Egypt, it is quite likely that this ac- 
count had a connection with the event relat- 
ed in Exodus ii, for every action, when once 
performed, has a tendency to be repeated.*' 
But now, when Professor Sayce has had the 
courage to push back the dates of the Chal- 
daean and Assyrian Kings by two thousand 
years more, Sargon must have preceded Moses 



by 2000 years at the least (See Professor 
Sayce*s Lectures on the subject) The con- 
fession is suggestive, but the figures lack a 
cypher or two. 

388. As a reminder how the Esoteric relig- 
ion of Moses was crushed several times, and 
the worship of Jehovah, as re-established by 
David, put in its place, by Hetekiah for one, 
read pp. 436-42, Vol. II, in Isis UmveiUd. 
Surely there must have been some very good 



THE CROSS^ A PHALLIC SYMBOL 321 

expression and a record of thought in every archaic symbolical Scrip- 
ture. They are ever the same, with only certain variations growing out 
of the first figures. Thus the evolution and correlation of the mysteries 
of Kosmos, of its growth and development — spiritual and physical, ab- 
stract and concrete — were first recorded in geometrical changes of shape. 
Every Q)smogony began with a circle, a point, a triangle, and a cube, up 
to number 9, when it was synthesized by the first line and a circle — the 
Pythagorean mystic Decad, the sum of all, involving and expressing the 
mysteries of the entire Kosmos ; recorded a hundred times more fully 
in the Hindu system, for him who can understand its mystic language. 
The niunbers 3 and 4, in their blending of 7, as those of 5, 6, 9, and 10, 
are the very comer-stone of Occult Cosmogonies. This decad and its 
thousand combinations are found in every portion of the globe. One 
recognizes them in the caves and rock-cut temples of Hindustan and 
Central Asia, as in the pyramids and lithoi of Egypt and America ; in 
the Catacombs of Os}miandyas, in the mounds of the Caucasian snow- 
capped fastnesses, in the ruins of Palenque, in Easter Island, every- 
where whither the foot of ancient man has ever journeyed. The 3 and 
the 4, the triangle and the cube, or the male and female universal glyph, 
showing the first aspect of the evolving deity, is stamped for ever in the 
Southern Cross in the Heavens, as in the Egyptian Crux-Ansata. As 
well expressed: 

The Cube unfolded is in display a cross of the tau, or Eg3rptian form, or of 
the Christian cross form. ... A circle attached to the first, gives the ansated 
cross . . . numbers 3 and 4 counted on the cross, showing a form of the 
(Hebrew) golden candlestick (in the Holy of Holies), and of the 3 + 4=7, and 
6+1 = 7, days in the circle of the week, as 7 lights of the sun. So also as the 
week of 7 lights gave origin to the month and year, so it is the time marker of 
birth. . . . The cross form being shown, then, by the connected use of the form 
113 : 355, the symbol is completed by the attachment of a man to the crossT^ 
This kind of measure was made to co-ordinate with the idea of the origin of 
human life, and hence the phallic form.*^ 

The Stansas show the cross and these numbers playing a prominent 
part in archaic cosmogony. Meanwhile we may profit by the evidence 
collected by the same author to show the identity of symbols and their 
esoteric meaning all over the globe, which he calls rightly the " pri- 
mordial vestiges of these symbols." 

reaionfl why the Sadduoect, who ftamithed 389. Onoe more, remember the Hindii 

almost all the high Priettt of Judaea, held Wittoba crucified in space; the significance 

to the laws of Moses and spumed the al- of the ** sacred sign," the Svastika; Plato's 

leged *' Books of Moses," the Pentateuch of Decussated man in Space, etc, etc 

the Synagogue and the Talmud. 390. Source of Measures, 



322 THE SECKET DOCTRINE 

Under the general view taken of the nature of the number forms . . . 
it becomes a matter of research of the utmost interest as to when and where 
their existence and their use first became known. Has it been a matter of 
revelation in what we know as the historic age — a cycle exceedingly modem 
when the age of the human race is contemplated? It seems, in fact, as to the 
date of its possession by man, to have been farther removed in the past from 
the old Egyptians than are the old Egyptians from us. 

The Easter Isles in "mid Pacific" present the feature of the remaining peaks 
of the mountains of a submerged continent, for the reason that these peaks are 
thickly studded with Cyclopean statues, remnants of the civilization of a dense 
and cultivated people, who must have of necessity occupied a widely extended 
area. On the back of these images is to be found the "ansated cross" and the 
same modified to the outlines of the human form. A full description, with 
plate showing the land, with the thickly planted statues, also with copies of the 
images, is to be found in the January number 1870 of the London BuUder, 

In the Naturalist, published at Salem, Massachusetts, in one of the early 
numbers, is to be found a description of some very ancient and curious carving 
on the crest walls of the mountains of South America, older by far, it is averred, 
than the races now living. The strangeness of these tracings is in that they 
exhibit the outlines of a man stretched out on a cross,"** by a series of drawings, 
by which from the form of a man that of a cross springs, but so done that the 
cross may be taken as the man, or the man as the cross; thus exhibiting a 
symbolic display of the interdependency of the forms set forth. 

It is known that tradition among the Aztecs has handed down a very perfect 
account of the deluge, . . . Baron Humboldt says that we are to look for the 
country of Aztalan, the original country of the Aztecs, as high up at least as 
the 42nd parallel north; whence, joume3ring, they at last arrived in the vale of 
Mexico. In that vale the earthen mounds of the far north become the elegant 
stone pyramidal and other structures whose remains are now found. The cor- 
respondences between the Aztec remains and those of the Egyptians are well 
known. . . . Attwater, from examination of hundreds of them, is convinced 
that they had a knowledge of astronomy. As to one of the most perfect of the 
pyramidal structures among the Aztecs, Humboldt gives a description to the 
follow^ig effect : 

"The form of this pyramid [of Papantla] which has seven stories, is more 
tapering than any other monument of this kind yet discovered, but its height is 
not remarkable, being but 57 feet, its base but 25 feet on each side. However, it 
is remarkable on one account: it is built entirely of hewn stones, of an extra- 
ordinary size, and very beautifully shaped. Three staircases lead to the top, the 
steps of which are decorated with hieroglyphical sculptures and small niches 
arranged with great symmetry. The number of these niches seems to allude 
to the 318 simple and compound signs of the days of their civil calendar." 

318 is the Gnostic value of Christ [remarks the author], and the famous 
number of the trained or circumcised servants of Abraham. When it is con- 

391. See Urthtr on tbe description given cnidfyinc the Sun, *' Vikkirtmna," iborn of 
of tbe early Arymn initiation: of Viirakarma his beams — on a crudform lath. 



IDENTITY OF THE ANCIENT SYMBOLS 323 

sidered that 318 is an abstract value, and universal, as expressive of a diameter 
value to a circumference of unity, its use in the composition of the civil calendar 
becomes manifest 

Identical glyphs, numbers and esoteric symbols are found in Egypt, 
Peru, Mexico, Easter Island, India, Chaldaea, and Central Asia. Cruci- 
fied men, and symbols of the evolution of races from gods; and yet 
behold Science repudiating the idea of a human race other than one 
made in our image; theology clinging to its 6000 years of Creation; 
anthropology teaching our descent from the ape ; and the Clergy tracing 
it from Adam 4004 years b. c. ! I 

Shall one, for fear of incurring the penalty of being called a super- 
stitious fool, and even a liar, abstain from furnishing proofs — as good 
as any — only because that day, when all the seven keys shall be deliv- 
ered imto Science, or rather the men of learning and research in the 
symbological department, has not yet davtrned ? In the face of the crush- 
ing discoveries of Geology and Anthropology with regard to the anti- 
quity of man, shall we — in order to avoid the usual penalty that awaits 
every one who strays outside the beaten paths of either Theology or 
Materialism — hold to the 6000 years and " special creation," or accept 
in submissive admiration our genealogy and descent from the ape ? Not 
so, as long as it is known that the secret records hold the said seven 
keys to the mystery of the genesis of man. Faulty, materialistic, and 
biased as the scientific theories may be, they are a thousand times nearer 
the truth than the vagaries of theology. The latter are in their death 
agony for every one but the most uncompromising bigot and fanatic.'*' 
Hence we have no choice but either to blindly accept the deductions of 
Science, or to cut adrift from it, and withstand it fearlessly to its face, 
stating what the Secret Doctrine teaches us, being fully prepared to 
bear the consequences. 

But let us see whether Science in its materialistic speculations, and 
even theology in its death-rattle and supreme struggle to reconcile the 
6000 years since Adam with Sir Charles Lyell's Geological Evidences 
of the Antiquity of Man, do not themselves give us unconsciously a 
helping hand. Ethnology, on the confession of some of its very learned 
votaries, finds it already impossible to account for the varieties in the 
human race, unless the hypothesis of the creation of several Adams be 
accepted. They speak of "a white Adam and a black Adam, a red 

392. Some of its defenders matt hare lost though " the Scriptures caref ully refrain (?) 
their reason, one would rather say. For what from making any direct contribution to sden* 
can one think when, in the face of th4 dead' tific knowledge, tk*y have never stumbled 
letter absurdities of the Bible, these are still upon any statement which will not abide the 
supported, publicly and as fiercely as ever, light of Aovancino SciSncc " ! 1 1 — (Prim- 
mad one finds its theologians maintaining that eval Man, p. 14). 



324 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

Adam and a yellow Adam,"*** Were they Hindus enumerating the 
rebirths of Vamadeva from the Linga Purana, they could say little 
more. For, enumerating the repeated births of Siva, the latter show 
him in one Kalpa of a white complexion, in another of a black color, in 
still another of a red color, after which the Kimiara becomes " four 
youths of a yellow color." This strange coincidence, as Mr. Proctor 
would say, speaks only in favor of scientific intuition, as Siva-Kumara 
represents only allegorically the human races during the genesis of man« 
But it led to another intuitional phenomenon — in the theological 
ranks this time. The unknown author of Primeval Man in a des- 
perate effort to screen the divine Revelation from the merciless and 
eloquent discoveries of geology and anthropology, remarking that " it 
would be unfortunate if the defenders of the Bible should be driven 
into the position of either surrendering the inspiration of Scripture, or 
denying the conclusions of geologists " — finds a compromise. Nay, 
he devotes a thick volume to proving this fact: "Adam was not the 
first man *•* created upon this earth." . . . The exhumed relics of pre- 
Adamic man, " instead of shaking our confidence in Scripture, supply 
additional proof of its veracity" (p. 194). How so? In the simplest 
way imaginable; for the auUior argues that henceforth "we" (the 
clergy) "are enabled to leave scientific men to pursue their studies 
without attempting to coerce them by the fear of heresy "... (this 
must be a relief indeed to Messrs. Huxley, T3mdall, and Sir C. Lyell). 

The Bible narrative does not commence with creation, as is commonly sup- 
posed, but with the formation of Adam and Eve, millions of years after our 
planet had been created. Its previous history, so far as Scripture is concerned, 
is yet unwritten. . . . There may have been not one, but twenty different races 
upon the earth before the time of Adam, just as there may be twenty different 
races of men on other worlds. ... (p. 55) 

Who, then, or what were those races, since the author still maintains 
that Adam is the first man of our race? It was the Satanic race and 
races! "Satan (was) never in heaven, Angels and men (being) one 
species." It was the pre-Adamic race of "Angels that sinned." Satan 
was " the first Prince of this world," we read. Having died in conse- 
quence of his rebellion, he remained on earth as a disembodied Spirit, 
and tempted Adam and Eve. 

The earlier ages of the Satanic race, and more especially during the life-time 
of Satan (HI ) may have been a period of patriarchal civilization and compar- 

393. Primtvcl Man Unvtiled, or th4 An- furnithed by the aatborixed Bible itself in 
ihropology of ih€ BibU; autbor [unknown] cb. ir of Genesis, tt. 16 and 17, wbicb ahows 
of tbe Stars and the Angels, 1870. p. 19S. Cain going to tbe land of Nod and tbere 

394. Especiallj in tbe face of tbe evidence marrying a wife. 



THE IMPARTIALITY OF SCIENTIFIC DENIALS 325 

ative repose — a time of Tubal-Cains and Jubals, when both Sciences and arts 
attempted to strike their roots into the accursed ground. . . . What a sub- 
ject for an epic . . . [when] there are inevitable incidents which must have 
occurred. We see before us . . . the gay primeval lover wooing his blushing 
bride at dewy eve under the Danish oaks, that then grew where now no oaks 
will grow . . . the grey primeval patriarch . . . the primeval offspring innocently 
gamboling by his side. ... A thousand such pictures rise before us! . . . 
(pp. 206-207). 

The retrospective glance at this Satanic "blushing bride" in the 
days of Satan's innocence does not lose in poetry as it gains in origin- 
ality. Quite the reverse. The modern Christian bride — who does 
not often blush nowadays before her gay modem lovers — might even 
derive a moral lesson from this daughter of Satan, in the exuberant 
fancy of her first human biographer. These pictures — and to appre- 
ciate them at their true value they must be examined in the volume 
that describes them — are all suggested with a view to reconcile the 
infallibility of revealed Scripture with Sir C. Lyell's Antiquity of 
Man and other damaging scientific works. But this does not prevent 
truth and fact appearing at the foundation of these vagaries, which 
the author has never dared to sign with his own, or even a borrowed 
name. For, his pre-Adamic races — not Satanic but simply Atlantic, 
and the Hermaphrodites before the latter — are mentioned in the Bible 
when read esoterically, as they are in the Secret Doctrine. The seven 
KEYS open the mysteries, past and future, of the seven great Root 
Races, as of the seven Kalpas. Though the genesis of man, and even 
the esoteric geology, will surely be rejected by Science just as much 
as the Satanic and pre-Adamic races, yet if having no other way out 
of their difficulties the Scientists have to choose between the two, we 
feel certain that. Scripture notwithstanding, once the mystery language 
is approximately mastered, it is the archaic teaching that will be accepted. 



§ III 
PRIMORDIAL SUBSTANCE AND DIVINE THOUGHT 

As it would seem irrational to affirm that we already know all existing causes, 
permission must be given to assume, if need be, an entirely new agent. 

Assuming, what is not strictly accurate as yet, that the undulatory hypothesis 
accounts for all the facts, we are called on to decide whether the existence of 
an undulating Ether is thereby proved. We cannot positively affirm that no other 
supposition will explain the facts, Newton's corpuscular hypothesis is admitted 



326 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

to have broken down on Interference ; and there is, at the present day, no rival. 
Still, It is extremely desirable in all such hypotheses to find some collateral con- 
firmation, some evidence aliunde, of the supposed ETHbr. . . . Some Hypotheses 
consist of assumptions as to the minute structure and operations of bodies. From 
the nature of the case, these assumptions can never be proved by direct means. 
Their only merit is their suitability to express the phenomena. They are repre- 
sentative FICTIONS."* 

Ether, this hypothetical Proteus, one of the "representative Fictions" 
of modem Science — which, nevertheless, was so long accepted — is 
one of the lower "principles" of what we call primordial substance 
(Aka^, in Sanskrit), one of the dreams of old, and which has now be- 
come again the dream of modem science. It is the greatest, just as it is 
the boldest, of the surviving speculations of ancient philosophers. For 
the Occultists, however, both ether and the Primordial Substance are 
a reality. To put it plainly, ether is the Astral Light, and the Primor- 
dial Substance is AkASa, the Up&dhi of divine thought. 

In modem language, the latter would be better named cosmic idea- 
tion — Spirit; the former, cosmic substance. Matter. These, the 
Alpha and the Omega of Being, are but the two facets of the one 
Absolute Existence. The latter was never addressed, or even men- 
tioned, by any name in antiquity, except allegorically. In the oldest 
Aryan race, the Hindu, the worship of the intellectual classes never 
consisted (as with the Greeks) in a fervent adoration of marvelous 
form and art, which led later on to anthropomorphism. But while the 
Greek philosopher adored form, and the Hindu sage alone " perceived 
the true relation of earthly beauty and eternal truth " — the uneducated 
of every nation understood neither, at any time. 

They do not tmderstand it even now. The evolution of the God-idea 
proceeds apace with man's own intellectual evolution. So true it is 
that the noblest ideal to which the religious Spirit of one age can soar, 
will appear but a gross caricature to the philosophic mind in a succeed- 
ing epoch! The philosophers themselves had to be initiated into per- 
ceptive mysteries, before they could grasp the correct idea of the an- 
cients in relation to this most metaphysical subject. Otherwise — out- 
side such initiation — for every thinker there will be a " Thus far shalt 
thou go and no farther," mapped out by his intellectual capacity, as 
clearly and as unmistakably as there is for the progress of any nation or 
race in its cycle by the law of Karma. jDutside of initiation, the ideals 
of contemporary religious thought must always have their wings clipped 
and remain unable to soar higher; for idealistic as well as realistic 
thinkers, and even free-thinkers, are but the outcome and the natural 
product of their respective environments and periods. The ideals of 

395. Lotic, by Alexander Bain, LUO., Part II, p. 133. 



^' 



DIVINE THOUGHT, OR CINERITIOUS MATTER 



327 



both are only the necessary results of their temperaments, and the out- 
come of that phase of intellectual progress to which a nation, in its col- 
lectivity, has attained. Hence, as already remarked, the highest flights 
of modem (Western) metaphysics have fallen far short of the truth. 
Much of current Agnostic speculation on the existence of the " First 
Cause " is little better than veiled materialism — the terminology alone 
being different. Even so great a thinker as Mr. Herbert Spencer speaks 
of the " Unknowable " occasionally in terms that demonstrate the 
lethal influence of materialistic thought, which, like the deadly Sirocco, 
has withered and blighted all current ontological speculation.*** 

From the early ages of the Fourth Race, when Spirit alone was wor- 
shiped and the mystery was made manifest, down to the last palmy days 
of Grecian art at the dawn of Christianity — the Hellenes alone had 
dared to raise publicly an altar to the Unknown God. Whatever St. 
Paul may have had in his profound mind when declaring to the Athen- 
ians that this " unknown," ignorantly worshiped by them, was the 
true God announced by himself — that Deity was not "Jehovah" 
(see "The Holy of Holies"), nor was he "The Maker of the world 
and all thmgs." For it is not the " God of Israel " but the " Unknown " 
of the ancient and modem Pantheist that "dwelleth not in temples 
made with hands." *^^ , 

Divine thought cannot be deflned, or its meaning explained, except 
by the numberless manifestations of Cosmic Substance in which the 
former is sensed spiritually by those who can do so. To say this, after 
having defined it as the Unknown Deity, abstract, impersonal, sexless, 
which must be placed at the root of every Cosmogony and its subse- 
quent evolution, is equivalent to saying nothing at all. It is like at- 
tempting a transcendental equation of conditions for the true values of 
a set, having in hand for deducing them only a number of unknotm 
quantities. Its place is foimd in the old primitive S)rmbolic charts, in 
which, as shown in the text, it is represented by a boundless darkness, 
on the ground of which appears the first central point in white — 
thus symbolizing coeval and co-eternal Spirit-Matter making its 
appearance in the phenomenal world, before its first differentiation. 



396. For intUnce, when he terms the 



<•• 



•• Flfit CauM " — the Unknowabi.« — a "pow- 
er manifesting throogfa phenomena," and "an 
infinite eternal Bntrgy" (?) it is clear that 
he hat gnaped aolelx the physical aspect of 
the mystery of Being — the Energies of 
Cosnic Snhstanoe only. The co-eternal as- 
pect of the Oifg RiALiTT — Cosmic Ideation 
— (at lo its nc«in€non, it teems non^xist' 



ent in the mind of the great thinker) it 
absolutely omitted from consideration. With- 
out doubt, this ons-sidsd mode of «U«lfag 
with the problem is due largely to the per- 
nicious Western practice of sabordinating 



consciousness, or regarding it 
product" of molecular motion. 

397. Acts xrii. 23-24. 



as a 



•« 



by- 



33 THE SCRET DOCTKINE 

\Miefi ''the one becomes two," it may then be referred to as Sfnrit and 
natter. To " Spirit " is referable every manifestation of consciousness, 
reflective or direct, and of unconscious purposiveness (to adopt a 
modem expression used in Western philosophy, so-called) as evidenced 
in the Vital Principle, and Nature's submission to the majestic se- 
quence of immutable law. " Matter " must be r^parded as objectivity 
in its purest abstraction — the self-existing basis whose septenary 
manvantaric differentiations constitute the objective reality imderlying 
the phenomena of each phase of conscious existence. During the 
period of Universal Prala3ra, Cosmic Ideation is non-existent ; and the 
variously differentiated states of Cosmic Substance are resolved back 
again into the primary state of abstract potential objectivity. 

Manvantaric impulse commences with the re-awakening of Cosmic 
Ideation (the " Universal Mind ") concurrently with, and parallel to 
the primary emergence of Cosmic Substance — the latter being the man- 
vantaric vehicle of the former — from its tmdifferentiated pralayic state. 
Then, absolute wisdom mirrors itself in its Ideation; which, by a 
transcendental process, superior to and incomprehensible by human 
Consciousness, results in Cosmic Energy (Fohat), Thrilling through 
the bosom of inert Substance, Fohat impels it to activity, and guides 
its primary differentiations on all the Seven planes of Cosmic Con- 
sciousness. There are thus Seven Protyles (as they are now called), 
while Aryan antiquity called them the Seven Prakriti, or Natures, 
serving, severally, as the relatively homogeneous basis, which in the 
course of the increasing heterogeneity (in the evolution of the Uni- 
verse) differentiate into the marvelous complexity presented by pheno- 
mena on the planes of perception. The term " relatively " is used 
designedly, because the very existence of such a process, resulting in 
the primary segregations of undifferentiated Cosmic Substance into its 
septenary bases of evolution, compels us to regard the protyle**^ of 
each plane as only a mediate phase assumed by Substance in its passage 
from abstract, into full objectivity. 

Cosmic Ideation is said to be non-existent during Pralayic periods, 
for the simple reason that there is no one, and nothing, to perceive its 
effects. There can be no manifestation of Consciousness, semi-con- 
sciousness, or even " unconscious purposiveness," except through the 

398. The term ProtyU U due to Mr. ordial nutter into atoms and moleoalet take* 
Crookea, the eminent chemist, who has given its rise subsequent to the erohition of the 
that name to pre-Mahtr, if one may so call Seven ProtyUs. It ia the last of theses- 
primordial and purely homogeneous sub* having recently detected the possibility of its 
stances, suspected, if not actually yet found, existence on our plane — diat Mr. Crookcs 
by Science in the ultimate composition of the is in search of. 
atom. But the indpient segregation of prim- 



THE UNIVERSAL ILLUSION 329 

vehicle of matter; that is to say, on this our plane, wherein human 
consciousness in its normal state cannot soar beyond what is known as 
transcendental metaphysics, it is only through some molecular aggrega- 
tion or fabric that Spirit wells up in a stream of individual or sub- 
conscious subjectivity. And as Matter existing apart from perception 
is a mere abstraction, both of these aspects of the Absolute — Cosmic 
Substance and Q)smic Ideation — are mutually inter-dependent. In 
strict accuracy — to avoid confusion and misconception — the term 
" Matter " ought to be applied to the aggregate of objects of possible 
perception, and " Substance " to noumena; for inasmuch as the phen- 
omena of our plane are the creation of the perceiving Ego — the modi- 
fications of its own subjectivity — all the "states of matter represent- 
ing the aggregate of perceived objects " can have but a relative and 
purely phenomenal existence for the children of our plane. As the 
modem Idealists would say, the co-operation of Subject and Object 
results in the Sense-object or phenomenon. But this does not neces- 
sarily lead to the conclusion that it is the same on all other planes ; that 
the co-operation of the two on the planes of their septenary differentia- 
tion results in a septenary aggregate of phenomena which are likewise 
non-existent per se, though concrete realities for the Entities of whose 
experience they form a part, in the same manner as the rocks and rivers 
around us are real from the standpoint of a physicist, though unreal illu- 
sions of sense from that of the metaphysician. It would be an error 
to say, or even conceive such a thing. From the stand-point of the 
highest metaphysics, the whole Universe, gods included, is an illusion ; 
but the illusion of him who is in himself an illusion differs on every 
plane of consciousness; and we have no more right to dogmatize 
about the possible nature of the perceptive faculties of an Ego on, say, 
the sixth plane, than we have to identify our perceptions with, or make 
them a standard for, those of an ant, in its mode of consciousness. The 
pure object apart from consciousness*** is unknown to us, while living 
on the plane of our three-dimensional World; as we know only the 
mental states it excites in the perceiving Ego. And, so long as the 
contrast of Subject and Object endures — to wit, as long as we enjoy 
our five senses and no more, and do not know how to divorce our all- 
perceiving Ego (the Higher Self) from the thraldom of these senses — 
so long will it be impossible for the personal Ego to break through the 
barrier which separates it from a knowledge of things in themselves {or 

399. Cbtmic Ideation focussed in a prin- up as Hind-Consciousness; througli the more 

dpie or upAdhi (basis) results as the con- finely differentiated fabric (sixth state of 

sdousness of the individual Ego. Its mani- matter) of the BuddfU resting on the exper- 

festation varies with the degree of upAdhi, ience of Manas as its basis — as a stream of 

#. g., through that known as Manat it wells q>iritual intuiTiom. 



330 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

Substance). That Ego, progressing in an arc of ascending subjectivity, 
must exhaust the experience of every plane. But not till the Unit is 
merged in the all, whether on this or any other plane, and Subject and 
Object alike vanish in the absolute negation of the Nirvanic State 
(negation, again, only from our plane), is scaled that peak of Omni- 
science — the Knowledge of things-in-themselves ; and the solution of 
the yet more awful riddle approached, before which even the highest 
Dhyan Chohan must bow in silence and ignorance — the unspeakable 
mystery of that which is called by the Vedantins, the Parabrahmam. 

Therefore, such being the case, all those who sought to give a name 
to the incognizable Principle have simply degraded it Even to speak 
of Q)smic Ideation — save in its phenomenal aspect — is like trying to 
bottle up primordial Chaos, or to put a printed label on Eternity. 

What, then, is the " primordial Substance," that mysterious object of 
which Alchemy was ever talking, and which became the subject of 
philosophical speculation in every age? What can it be finally, even 
in its phenomenal pre-differentiation ? Even that is all in manifested 
Nature and — nothing to our senses. It is mentioned under various 
names in every Cosmogony, referred to in every philosophy, and shown 
to be, to this day, the ever grasp-eluding Proteus in Nature. We 
touch and do not feel it ; we look at it without seeing it ; we breathe 
it and do not perceive it; we hear and smell it without the smallest 
cognition that it is there; for it is in every molecule of that which in 
our illusion and ignorance we regard as Matter in any of its states, or 
conceive as a feeling, a thought, an emotion. ... In short, it is the 
" upddhi," or vehicle, of every possible phenomenon, whether physical, 
mental or psychic. In the opening sentences of Genesis, as in the 
Chaldaean Cosmogony; in the Purdnas of India, and in the Book of 
the Dead of Egypt, it opens everjrwhere the cycle of manifestation. 
It is termed " Chaos," and the face of the waters, incubated by the 
Spirit proceeding from the Unknown, under whatever name.*®* 

The authors of the sacred Scriptures in India go deeper into the 
origin of things evolved than Thales or Job, for they say : — 

" From Intelligence (called Mahat in the Puranas) associated 
with Ignorance (Isvara, as a personal deity) attended by its projective 
power, in which the quality of dulness {tamos, insensibility) predomin- 
ates, proceeds Ether — from ether, air ; from air, heat ; from heat, 
water; and from water, earth " with everything on it." " From this, 
from this same self, was the Ether produced," says the Veda.*** 

It becomes thus evident that it is not this Ether — sprung at the fourth 

400. See P»rt H, | iv. ** Chaos, Thcot, Koonot." 40L TaiiHriya UptmUhoi, II, L 



ETHER, AS ITS NOUMENON 



331 



remove from an Emanation of Intelligence "associated with Ignorance" 

— which is the high principle, the deific Entity worshiped by the 
Greeks and Latins under the name of "Pater omnipotens Aether" and 
"Magnus Aether" in its collective aggregates. The septenary grada- 
tion, and the innumerable subdivisions and differences, made by the 
ancients between the powers of Ether collectively, from its outward 
fringe of effects, with which our Science is so familiar, up to the 
" Imponderable Substance," once admitted as the " Ether of Space," 
now about to be rejected, has been ever a vexing riddle for every 
branch of knowledge. The mythologists and S)rmbologists of our day, 
confused by this incomprehensible glorification, on the one hand, and 
degradation on the other, of the same deified entity and in the same 
religious systems, are often driven to the most ludicrous mistakes. The 
Church, firm as a rock in each and all of her early errors of interpre- 
tation, has made of Ether the abode of her Satanic legions.*®* The 
whole hierarchy of the " Fallen " angels is there ; the Cosmocratores 

— or the " world bearers," (according to Bossuet) ; Mundi Tenentes — 
the "world holders," as Tertullian calls them; and Mundi Domini, 
" world dominations," or rather dominators, the Curbati, or " Curved," 
etc., who thus make of the stars and celestial orbs in their course — 
Devils! 

The difference made between the seven states of Ether (itself one 
of the Seven Cosmic principles), while the Aether of the Ancients is 
universal Fire, may be seen in the injunctions by Zoroaster and Psellus, 
respectively. The former said : " Consult it only when it is without 
form or figure," absque forma et figura, which means without flames or 
burning coals. " When it has a form — heed it not," teaches Psellus ; 
" but when it is formless, obey it, for it is then sacred fire, and all it 
will reveal thee, shall be true."*®* This proves that Ether, itself an 
aspect of Akasa, has in its turn several aspects or " principles." 

All the ancient nations deified Aether in its imponderable aspect and 
potency. Virgil calls Jupiter, Pater omnipotens Aether, "the great 
Aether." *®* The Hindus have also placed it among their deities, under 
the name of Akasa (the synthesis of Aether). And the author of the 



402. For it is thus that the Church has 
iDterprcted Terse 12 in the VI Chapter to 
the Ephesians. " For we wrestle not against 
flesh and blood, but against principalities, 
against powers, against the rulers of the 
darkness of this world." Further on St. 
Paul mentions the spiritual malices ("wick- 
edness" in English texts) stksao in Ths air 
--"Spirihtalia nequitiat in coeUstUms" the 
I<«tin texts giving various names to these 



"malices," the kinooent " Elcmentals." But 
the Church is right this time, though wrong 
in calling them all devils. The astial uoht 
or lower Ether is full of conscious and 
semi-conscious and unconscious entities; only 
the church has less power over them than 
over invisible microbes or mosquitoes. 

403. Bffahtm XVL "Oracles of Zoro- 
aster." 

404. Georgica, Book U, Line 32S. 



332 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

Homoiomerian System of philosophy, Anaxagoras of Clazomcnae, 
firmly believed that the spiritual prototypes of all things, as well as 
their elements, were to be found in the boundless Ether where they 
were generated, whence they evolved, and whither they returned — an 
Occult teaching. 

It thus becomes clear that it is from Ether in its highest synthetic 
aspect, once anthropomorphized, that sprang the first idea of a personal 
creative deity. With the philosophical Hindus the elements are Tamos, 
i. e., " tmenlightened by intellect, which they obscure." 

We have now to exhaust the question of the mystical meaning of 
" Primordial Chaos " and of the Root-Principle, and show how they 
were connected in the ancient philosophies with Akasa, wrongly trans- 
lated Aether, and also with Maya (illusion) — of which tivara is the 
male aspect. We shall speak further on of the intelligent " principle," 
or rather of the invisible imnta4erial properties, in the visible and 
material elements, that "sprang from the primordial Chaos." 

For, "What is the primordial Chaos but Aether?" it is asked in 
" Isis Unveiled." Not the modern Ether ; not such as is recognized 
now, but such as was known to the ancient philosophers long before the 
time of Moses ; but Aether, with all its mysterious and occult properties, 
containing in itself the germs of universal creation. Upper Aether or 
Akasa, is the celestial virgin and mother of every existing form and 
being, from whose bosom, as soon as " incubated " by the Divine Spirit, 
are called into existence Matter and Life, Force and Action. Aether is 
the Aditi of the Hindus, and it is Akasa. Electricity, magnetism, heat, 
light, and chemical action are so little understood even now that fresh 
facts are constantly widening the range of our knowledge. Who 
knows where ends the power of this protean giant — Aether; or 
whence its m)rsterious origin? Who, we mean, that denies the spirit 
that works in it, and evolves out of it all visible forms ? 

It will be an easy task to show that the cosmogonical legends all over 
the world are based on a knowledge by the ancients of those sciences, 
which have allied themselves in our days in support of the doctrine of 
evolution; and that further research may demonstrate that those an- 
cients were far better acquainted with the fact of evolution itself, 
embracing both its physical and spiritual aspects, than we are now. 

With the old philosophers, evolution was a universal theorem, a doctrine em- 
bracing the whole, and an established principle; while our modem evolutionists 
are enabled to present us merely with speculative theoretics; with particular, if 
not wholly negative theorems. It is idle for the representatives of our modem 
wisdom to close the debate and pretend that the question is settled, merely be- 
cause the obscure phraseology of the Mosaic, far later, account clashes with 
the definite exegesis of "Exact Science."— ('7jw Unveiled") 



WHAT MANU SAYS OF THIS 333 

If one turns to the " Laws (or Ordinances) of Manu," one finds the 
prototype of all these ideas. Mostly lost (to the Western world) in 
their original form, disfigured by later interpolations and additions, 
they have, nevertheless, preserved quite enough of their ancient Spirit 
to show its character. "Removing the darkness, the Self-existent 
Lord" (Vishnu, Narayano, etc.) becoming manifest, and "wishing to 
produce beings from his Essence, created, in the beginning, water alone. 
In that he cast seed. . . . That became a golden ^g." (v. 6, 7, 8, 9) 
Whence this Self-existent Lord? It is called this, and is spoken of 
as " Darkness, imperceptible, without definite qualities, undiscoverable 
as if wholly in sleep." (v. 5) Having dwelt in that Egg for a whole 
divine year, he " who is called in the world Brahma," splits that Egg 
in two, and from the upper portion he forms the heaven, from the 
lower the earth, and from the middle the sky and " the perpetual place 
of waters." (12, 13) 

But there is, directly following these verses, something more impor- 
tant for us, as it corroborates entirely our esoteric teachings. From 
verse 14 to 36, evolution is given in the order described in the Esoteric 
philosophy. This cannot be easily gainsaid. Even Medhatithi, the son 
of Virasvamin, and the author of the Commentary, " the Manubhasya," 
whose date, according to the western Orientalists, is 1000 a. d., helps 
us with his remarks to the elucidation of the truth. He showed him- 
self either unwilling to give out more, because he knew that truth 
which has to be kept from the profane, or else he was really puzzled. 
Still, what he does give out makes the septenary principle in men and 
nature plain enough. 

Let us begin with Chapter I. of the " Ordinances " or " Laws " after 
the Self-existent Lord, the unmanifesting Logos of the Unknown 
Darkness," becomes manifested in the golden Egg. It is from this 
Egg," from — 



it 



(11.) That which is the undiscrete (undifferentiated) cause, eternal, which 
Is and Is not, from It issued that male who is called in the world Brahma. . . . 

Here we find, as in all genuine philosophical systems, even the 
" Egg " or the Circle (or Zero), boundless Infinity, referred to as It,^®' 
and Brahma, the first unit only, referred to as the male god, «. e,, the 
fructifying Principle. It is © or 10 (ten) the Decad. On the plane of 
the Septenary or our World only, it is called Brahma. On that of the 
Unified Decad in the realm of Reality, this male Brahma is an illusion. 

40S. The ideal apex of the Pythagorean and Circle/' and the *' ^rliest Symbolics of 
triangle: vide Sections in VoL II, "Cross the Cross.*' 



334 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

(14.) From Self i&tmanah) he created mind, (1) which is and is not; 
(2) and from mind. Ego-ism (Self -Consciousness) the ruler; (3) the Lord. 

(1.) The mind is Man<MS. Medhatithi, the commentator, justly ob- 
serves here that it is the reverse of this and shows already interpola- 
tion and rearranging; for it is Manas that springs from Ahamkara or 
(Universal) Self-Consciousness, as Manas in the microcosm springs 
from Mahat, or Mahi-Buddhi (Buddhi, in man). For Manas is dual, 
and as shown and translated by Q)lebrooke, " is serving both for sense 
and action, is an organ by aflRnity, being cognate with the rest" " The 
rest " means, here, that Manas, our fifth principle (the fifth, because 
the body was named the first, which is the reverse of the true philo- 
sophical order) *^ is in affinity both with Atma-Buddhi and witfi the 
lower four principles. Hence, our teaching: namely, that Manas fol- 
lows Atma-Buddhi to Devachan, and that the lower (dregs, the resi- 
due of) Manas remains with Kama-rupa, in Limbus, or Kama-loka, 
the abode of the " Shells." 

(2.) Such is the meaning of Manas, which " is, and is not." 
(3.) Medhatithi translates it as " the one conscious of the I," or Ego, 
not " ruler," as the Orientalists do. Thus they translate verse 16 : 

He also, having made the subtile parts of those six [the Great Self and the 
five organs of sense] of unmeasured brightness, to enter into the elements of 
Self (Atmamdtrdsu) created all beings. 

When, according to Medhatithi, it ought to read mairchChit instead 
of " Atmamatrasu," and thus be made to say : — 

He having pervaded the subtile parts of those six, of unmeasured brightness, 
by elements of self, created all beings. 

This latter reading must be the correct one, since he, the Self, is what 
we call Atma, and thus constitutes the seventh principle, the synthesis 
of the '' six" Such is also the opinion of the editor of M&nava^dharma 
Sastra, who seems to have intuitionally entered far deeper into the 
spirit of the philosophy than has the translator of the Ordinances 
of Manu, the late Dr. Bumell. For he hesitates little between the text 
of KuUuka and the Commentaries of Medhatithi. Rejecting the tan- 
mdira, or subtle elements, and the atmamatrasu of Kulluka, he says, 
applying the principles to the Cosmic Self: " The six appear rather to 
be tiic manas plus the five principles of Ether, air, fire, water, 
earth ; " " having united five portions of these six with the spiritual ele- 
ment [the seventh] he [thus] created all existing things ; " dtmamatra 
is therefore the spiritual atom as opposed to the elementary, not reflec- 
tive "elements of himself." Thus he corrects the translation of verse — 

406. Vide A. Ctokc Burnell'i tnmilation, edited by Kd. W. Hopkins, Ph. D. 



TH0 SEVEN PRAKMTIS 335 

(17.) As the subtile elements of bodily forms of This One depend on these 
six, so the wise call his form (arira [Sarira]. 

— and he says that " Elements " mean here portions or parts (or prin- 
ciples), which reading is borne out by verse 19, which says: — 

(19.) This non-eternal [Universe] arises then from the Eternal, by means of 
the subtile elements of forms of those seven very glorious principles (purusha). 

Commenting upon which, according to Medhatithi, the Editor re- 
marks that *' the five elements plus mind (Manas) and Self-Conscious- 
ness (Ahamkara**^^) are meant;" "subtle elements," as before (mean- 
ing) " five portions of form " (or principles). For verse 20 shows it, 
when saying of these (five elements, or) "five portions of form" (rUpa, 
plus Manas and Self-Consciousness) that they constitute the "seven 
purusha" or principles, called in the Puranas the " Seven Prakritis." 

Moreover, these " five elements " or " five portions " are spoken of 

in verse 27 as " those which are called the atomic destructible portions " 

— therefore " distinct from the atoms of the nyaya'' 

This creative Brahma, issuing from the mundane or golden egg, unites 
in himself both the male and the female principles. He is, in short, the 
same as all the creative Protologoi. Of Brahma, however, it could 

not be said, as of Dionysos : "irpci>rdyovov iu^vri rpiyovov BoKxdov ^'Avoicra 

*'Aypiov Spfn/Tov Kpw^iov iucipiora Hyuop^iny* — a lunar Jehovah — Bacchus 
truly, with David dancing nude before his symbol in the ark — because 
no licentious Dionysia were ever established in his name and honor. All 
such public worship was exoteric, and the great universal symbols were 
distorted universally, as those of Krishna are now by die Vallaba- 
charyas of Bombay, the followers of the infant god. But are these 
popular gods the true Deity? Are they the Apex and synthesis of the 
sevenfold creation, man included? Never! Each and all are one of 
the nmgs of that septenary ladder of Divine Consciousness, pagan as 
Christian. For Ain-Soph also is said to manifest through the Seven 
Letters of Jehovah's name who, having usurped the place of the Un- 
known Limitless, was given by his devotees his Seven Angels of the 
Presence — his Seven Principles. Yet they are mentioned in almost 
every school. In the pure Sankhya philosophy mahat, ahamkara, and 
the five tanmatras are called the seven Prakritis (or Natures), and they 
are counted from Mahd-Buddhi or Mahat down to Earth.^^^ 

407. AhamkAra, u tinivenal Self-Con- nant/' in darkness. It belongs to Heav- 

•csonsneas, lias a triple aspect, as also Manas. en and Klirtb, and assumes the properties 

For this conception of " I/' or one's Bgo, of ekher. 

is either jattva, "pure (luietude," or appears 408. See SAnkhya KArikd III, and Com- 
as ftt/w, "active," or remains tanuu, "stag- mentaries. 



336 



THE SECK^ DOCTRINE 



Nevertheless, however disfigured for Rabbinical purposes is the 
original Blohistic version by Ezra, however repulsive at times even the 
esoteric meaning in the Hebrew scrolls, which is far more so than its 
outward veil or cloaking may be*®* — once the Jehovistic portions are 
eliminated, the Mosaic Books are found full of purely occult and price- 
less knowledge, especially in the first six chapters. 

Read by the aid of the Kabala one finds a matchless temple of occult 
truths, a well of deeply concealed beauty hidden under a structure, the 
visible architecture of which, its apparent symmetry notwithstanding, is 
unable to stand the criticism of cold reason, or to reveal its age, for it 
belongs to all the ages. There is more wisdom concealed under the ex- 
oteric fables of Puranas and Bible than in all the exoteric facts and 
science in the literature of the world, and more occult true Science, 
than there is of exact knowledge in all the academies. Or, in plainer 
and stronger language, there is as much esoteric wisdom in some por- 
tions of the exoteric Puranas and Pentateuch, as there is of nonsense 
and of designed childish fancy in it, when read only in the dead-letter 
murderous interpretations of great dogmatic religions, and especially 
of sects. 

Let any(me read the first verses of chapter i. of Genesis and reflect 
upon them. There " God " commands to another " god," who does his 
bidding — even in the cautious English Protestant translation of James 
the First's authorized editi(m. 

In the " beginning," the Hebrew language having no word to express 
the idea of Eternity,*^® " God " fashions the heaven and the Earth; and 
the latter is " without form and void," while the former is no Heaven 
in fact, but the " Deep," Chaos, with darkness upon its face.*" 

" And the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the Waters " 
(v. 2), or the great Deep of the Infinite Space. And this Spirit is 
Ndra-yana, or Vishnu. 



»( 



409. See " The Holy of Holies.' 

410. The word "eternity." by which 
Christiaii theologians interpret the term *' for 
ever and ever," does not exist in the He> 
brew tongue — either as a word or m ean in g. 
Ouhm, says Le Qerc, only imports a time 
when beginning or end is not known. It 
does not mean "infiniU duration/' and the 
word for tvtt in the Old Testament, only 
signifies a "long time." Nor is the term 
"eternity" used in the Christian sense in 
the Purinas. For in Vuknn PurAna, it is 
clearly stated that by Eternity and Immor- 
tality only "existence to the end of the 
Kalpa" U meant (Book U, chap. viU). 



411. Orphic theogony is purely Oriental 
and Indian in its Spirit The suocessiTe 
transformations it has undergone, have now 
separated it widely from the tpirit of an* 
dent Cosmogony, as may be seen by com- 
paring it even with Hesiod's theogony. Yet 
the truly Aryan Hindu spirit breaks forth 
ev rywhere in both Hesiod's and the Orphic 
theogony. (See the remarkable work of 
James Darmesteter, Ccsmogcnut Aryennes, 
in his Bssais Oritntaux,) Thus the original 
Greek conception of (^aos is that of the 
Secret Wisdom Religion. In Hesiod, there- 
fore, (^aos is infinite, boundless, endless and 
beginningless in duration, an abstraction at 



DARKNESS, IS I^IGHT 337 

" And God said, Let there be a firmament. . . ." (v. 6), and " God," 
the second, obeyed and " made the firmament " (v. 7). "And God said 
let there be light," and " there was light." Now the latter does not 
mean light at all, but in the Kabala, the androgyne ''Adam Kadmon," 
or Sephira (Spiritual light), for they are one; or, according to the 
Chaldaean "Book of Numbers," the secondary angels, the first being 
the Elohim who are the aggregate of that "fashioning" god. For to 
whom are those words of command addressed? And who is it who 
commands? That which commands is the eternal Law, and he who 
obeys, the Blohim, the known quantity acting in and with x, or the co- 
efficient of the unknown quantity, the Forces of the one Force. All 
this is Occultism, and is found in the archaic stanzas. It is perfectly 
immaterial whether we call these " Forces " the Dhyan Chohans, or 
the Ophanim, as St. John does. 

" The one Universal Light, which to Man is Darkness, is ever exist- 
ent," says the Chaldaean "Book of Numbers.'^ From it proceeds per- 
iodically the Energy, which is reflected in the " Deep " or Chaos, the 
store-house of future worlds, and, once awakened, stirs up and fruc- 
tifies the latent Forces, which are the ever present eternal potentialities 
in it. Then awake anew the Brahmas and Buddhas — the co-eternal 
Forces — and a new Universe springs into being. . . . 

In the Sepher Jezireh, the Kabalistic Book of Creation, the author 
has evidently repeated the words of Manu. In it, the Divine Substance 
is represented as having alone existed from the eternity, boundless and 
absolute ; and as having emitted from itself the Spirit*^' " One is the 
Spirit of the living God, blessed be Its name, which liveth for ever! 
Voice, Spirit, and Word, this is the Holy Spirit;"*" and this is the 
Kabalistic abstract Trinity, so unceremoniously anthropomorphized 
by the Christian Fathers. From this triple One emanated the whole 
Kosmos. First from One emanated number Two, or Air (the Father), 
the creative element; and then number Three, Water (the Mother), 
proceeded from the air ; Ether or Fire completes the mystic four, the 
Arba-il.*^* When the Concealed of the Concealed wanted to reveal 
Himself, he first made a point (primordial point, or the first Sephir- 
oth, air, or Holy Ghost), shaped into a sacred form (the ten Seph- 

thc same time at a visible presence. (Spacs Substance: Parabrahm and Mfilaprakriti are 

filled with darkness, whicn is primordial mat- one in essence. Therefore, Cosmic Ideation 

ter in its prt-cosmic state. For in its etymo- and Cosmic Substance in their primal char- 

logical sense. Chaos is Space, according to acter are one also. 

Aristotle, and Space is lA# ever Unseen and 413. Stphtr J t Mirth, chapter 1, Mish- 

Unknowable Deity in our philosophy. na ix. 

412. The manifested Spirit; Absolute, 414. Ihid, It is from Arba that Abram is 

Divine Spirit is one with absolute Divine made to come. 



328 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

When "the one becomes two," it may then be referred to as Spirit and 
matter. To " Spirit " is referable every manifestation of consciousness, 
reflective or direct, and of unconscious purposiveness (to adopt a 
modem expression used in Western philosophy, so-called) as evidenced 
in the Vital Principle, and Nature's submission to the majestic se- 
quence of immutable law. " Matter " must be regarded as objectivity 
in its purest abstraction — the self-existing basis whose septenary 
manvantaric differentiations constitute the objective reality tmderlying 
the phenomena of each phase of conscious existence. During the 
period of Universal Pralaya, Q)smic Ideation is non-existent ; and the 
variously differentiated states of Cosmic Substance are resolved back 
again into the primary state of abstract potential objectivity. 

Manvantaric impulse commences with the re-awakening of Cosmic 
Ideation (the " Universal Mind ") concurrently with, and parallel to 
the primary emergence of Cosmic Substance — the latter being the man- 
vantaric vehicle of the former — from its undifferentiated pralayic state. 
Then, absolute wisdom mirrors itself in its Ideation; which, by a 
transcendental process, superior to and incomprehensible by human 
Consciousness, results in Cosmic Energy (Fohat). Thrilling through 
the bosom of inert Substance, Fohat impels it to activity, and guides 
its primary differentiations on all the Seven planes of Cosmic Con- 
sciousness. There are thus Seven Protyles (as they are now called), 
while Aryan antiquity called them the Seven Prakriti, or Natures, 
serving, severally, as the rekUively homogeneous basis, which in the 
course of the increasing heterogeneity (in the evolution of the Uni- 
verse) differentiate into the marvelous complexity presented by pheno- 
mena on the planes of perception. The term " relatively " is used 
designedly, because the very existence of such a process, resulting in 
the primary segregations of undifferentiated Cosmic Substance into its 
septenary bases of evolution, compels us to regard the protyle^^ of 
each plane as only a mediate phase assumed by Substance in its passage 
from abstract, into full objectivity. 

Cosmic Ideation is said to be non-existent during Pralayic periods, 
for the simple reason that there is no one, and nothing, to perceive its 
effects. There can be no manifestation of Consciousness, semi-con- 
sciousness, or even "unconscious purposiveness," except through the 

398. The term ProiyU is due to Mr. ordial matter into atoms and molecalcs takes 

Crookes, the eminent chemist, who has given its rise subsequent to the erolation of tbe 

that name to prg-Maittr, if one may so call Seven ProtyUs. It is the last of these — 

primordial and purely homogeneous sub* having recently detected tbe possibility of its 

stances, suspected, if not actually yet found, existence on our plane — tiiat Mr. Croobes 

by Science in die ultimate composition of the is in search of. 
atom. But the iodpient s e greg ation of prim- 



THE UNIVERSAL ILLUSION 329 

vehicle of matter; that is to say, on this our plane, wherein human 
consciousness in its normal state cannot soar beyond what is known as 
transcendental metaphysics, it is only through some molecular aggrega- 
tion or fabric that Spirit wells up in a stream of individual or sub- 
conscious subjectivity. And as Matter existing apart from perception 
is a mere abstraction, both of these aspects of the Absolute — Cosmic 
Substance and Cosmic Ideation — are mutually inter-dependent. In 
strict accuracy — to avoid confusion and misconception — the term 
" Matter " ought to be applied to the aggregate of objects of possible 
perception, and " Substance " to noumena; for inasmuch as the phen- 
omena of our plane are the creation of the perceiving Ego — the modi- 
fications of its own subjectivity — all the " states of matter represent- 
ing the aggregate of perceived objects " can have but a relative and 
purely phenomenal existence for the children of our plane. As the 
modem Idealists would say, the co-operation of Subject and Object 
results in the Sense-object or phenomenon. But this does not neces- 
sarily lead to the conclusion that it is the same on all other planes ; that 
the co-operation of the two on the planes of their septenary differentia- 
tion results in a septenary aggregate of phenomena which are likewise 
non-existent per se, though concrete realities for the Entities of whose 
experience they form a part, in the same manner as the rocks and rivers 
around us are real from the standpoint of a physicist, though unreal illu- 
sions of sense from that of the metaphysician. It would be an error 
to say, or even conceive such a thing. From the stand-point of the 
highest metaphysics, the whole Universe, gods included, is an illusion ; 
but the illusion of him who is in himself an illusion differs on every 
plane of consciousness; and we have no more right to dogmatize 
about the possible nature of the perceptive faculties of an Ego on, say, 
the sixth plane, than we have to identify our perceptions with, or make 
them a standard for, those of an ant, in its mode of consciousness. The 
pure object apart from consciousness*** is unknown to us, while living 
on the plane of our three-dimensional World; as we know only the 
mental states it excites in the perceiving Ego. And, so long as the 
contrast of Subject and Object endures — to wit, as long as we enjoy 
our five senses and no more, and do not know how to divorce our all- 
perceiving Bgo (the Higher Self) from the thraldom of these senses — 
so long will it be impossible for the personal Ego to break through the 
barrier which separates it from a knowledge of things in themselves (or 

399. Connie Ideation focuMed in a prin- up as Mind-Consciousness; through the more 

ciple or upAdhi (basis) results as the con- finely differentiated fabric (sixth state of 

sdousness of the individual Ego. Its mani- matter) of the Buddhi resting on the exper- 

festation varies with the degree of upddki, ience of Manas as its basis — as a stream of 

e.g., through that known as Manas k wells spiritual intuition. 



330 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

Substance), That Ego, progressing in an arc of ascending subjectivity, 
must exhaust the experience of every plane. But not till the Unit is 
merged in the all, whether on this or any other plane, and Subject and 
Object alike vanish in the absolute negation of the Nirvanic State 
(negation, again, only from our plane), is scaled that peak of Omni- 
science — the Knowledge of things-in-themselves ; and the solution of 
the yet more awful riddle approached, before which even the highest 
Dhyan Chohan must bow in silence and ignorance — the unspeakable 
mystery of that which is called by the Vedantins, the Parabrahmam. 

Therefore, such being the case, all those who sought to give a name 
to the incognizable Principle have simply degraded it. Even to speak 
of Cosmic Ideation — save in its phenomenal aspect — is like trying to 
bottle up primordial Chaos, or to put a printed label on Eternity. 

What, then, is the " primordial Substance," that mysterious object of 
which Alchemy was ever talking, and which became the subject of 
philosophical speculation in every age? What can it be finally, even 
in its phenomenal pre-diff erentiation ? Even that is au in manifested 
Nature and — nothing to our senses. It is mentioned under various 
names in every Cosmogony, referred to in every philosophy, and shown 
to be, to this day, the ever grasp-eluding Proteus in Nature. We 
touch and do not feel it ; we look at it without seeing it ; we breathe 
it and do not perceive it; we hear and smell it without the smallest 
cognition that it is there ; for it is in every molecule of that which in 
our illusion and ignorance we regard as Matter in any of its states, or 
conceive as a feeling, a thought, an emotion. ... In short, it is the 
" up&dhi," or vehicle, of every possible phenomenon, whether physical, 
mental or psychic. In the opening sentences of Genesis^ as in the 
Chaldaean Cosmogony; in the Purdnas of India, and in the Book of 
the Dead of Egypt, it opens everywhere the cycle of manifestation. 
It is termed " Chaos," and the face of the waters, incubated by the 
Spirit proceeding from the Unknown, under whatever name.*** 

The authors of the sacred Scriptures in India go deeper into the 
origin of things evolved than Thales or Job, for they say : — 

"From Intelligence (called Mahat in the Puranas) associated 
with Ignorance (Isvara, as a personal deity) attended by its projective 
power, in which the quality of dulness (tamos, insensibility) predomin- 
ates, proceeds Ether — from ether, air ; from air, heat ; from heat, 
water ; and from water, earth " with everything on it." " From this, 
from this same self, was the Ether produced," says the Veda.*** 

It becomes thus evident that it is not this Ether — sprung at the fourth 

400. See Part 11, | vr, " Chaoa, Theot, Kosmot." 401. Taiitiriya Upamitkad, U, U 



ETHER, AS ITS NOUMENON 



331 



remove from an Emanation of Intelligence "associated with Ignorance" 

— which is the high principle, the deific Entity worshiped by the 
Greeks and Latins under the name of "Pater otnnipotens Aether," and 
"Magnus Aether" in its collective aggregates. The septenary grada- 
tion, and the innumerable subdivisions and differences, made by the 
ancients between the powers of Ether collectively, from its outward 
fringe of effects, with which our Science is so familiar, up to the 
" Imponderable Substance," once admitted as the " Ether of Space," 
now about to be rejected, has been ever a vexing riddle for every 
branch of knowledge. The mythologists and symbologists of our day, 
confused by this incomprehensible glorification, on the one hand, and 
degradation on the other, of the same deified entity and in the same 
religious systems, are often driven to the most ludicrous mistakes. The 
Church, firm as a rock in each and all of her early errors of interpre- 
tation, has made of Ether the abode of her Satanic legions.*^' The 
whole hierarchy of the " Fallen " angels is there ; the Cosmocratores 

— or the " world bearers," (according to Bossuet) ; Mundi Tenentes — 
the "world holders," as TertuUian calls them; and Mundi Domini, 
" world dominations," or rather dominators, the Curbati, or " Curved," 
etc., who thus make of the stars and celestial orbs in their course — 
Devils ! 

The difference made between the seven states of Ether (itself one 
of the Seven Cosmic principles), while the Aether of the Ancients is 
universal Fire, may be seen in the injunctions by Zoroaster and Psellus, 
respectively. The former said : " Consult it only when it is without 
form or figure," absque forma et figura, which means without flames or 
burning coals. " When it has a form — heed it not" teaches Psellus ; 
" but when it is formless, obey it, for it is then sacred fire, and all it 
will reveal thee, shall be true."*®* This proves that Ether, itself an 
aspect of Akasa, has in its turn several aspects or " principles." 

All the ancient nations deified Aether in its imponderable aspect and 
potency. Virgil calls Jupiter, Pater omnipotens Aether, "the great 
Aether." *®* The Hindus have also placed it among their deities, under 
the name of Akasa (the synthesis of Aether). And the author of the 



402. For it it thui that the Church has 
Interpreted Terse 12 in the VI Chapter to 
the Epheaiana. " For we wrestle not against 
flesh and blood, but against principalities, 
against powers, against the rulers of the 
darkness of this world." Further on St 
Paul mentions the spiritual malices ("wick- 
edness" in English texts) spsxao iir THt Ait 
— "SpirUnalia nequitiag in coeUsHbui/' the 
Latin texts giWng Tarious names to these 



"malices," the innocent " Elementals." But 
the Church is right this time, though wrong 
in calling them all devils. The astbal light 
or lower Ether is full of conscious and 
semi-conscious and unconscious entities; only 
the church has less power over them than 
over invisible microbes or mosquitoes. 

403. BffatuM XVL "Oracles of Zoro- 
aster." 

404. Georgica, Book II, Line 325. 



342 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

§IV 

CHAOS — THEOS — KOSMOS 

These three are the containment of Space ; or, as a learned Kabalist 
has defined it, " Space, the all containing uncontained, is the primary 
embodiment of simple Unity . . . botmdless extension." **• But, he zsks 
again, " boundless extension of what? " — and makes the correct reply : 
"The unknown container of all, the Unknown FIRST CAUSE." 
This is a most correct definition and answer, most esoteric and true, 
from every aspect of occult teaching. 

SPACE, which, in their ignorance and iconoclastic tendency to 
destroy every philosophic idea of old, the modem wiseacres have pro- 
claimed "an abstract idea" and a void, is, in reality, the container and 
the body of the Universe with its seven principles. It is a body of limit- 
less extent, whose PRINCIPLES, in Occult phraseology — each being 
in its turn a septenary — manifest in our phenomenal world only the 
grossest fabric of their sub-divisions, " No one has ever seen the Ele- 
ments in their fulness," the Doctrine teaches. We have to search for 
our Wisdom in the original expressions of the primeval people and in 
their synonyms. Even the latest of them — the Jews — show in their 
Kabalistic teachings this idea, e, g., the seven-headed Serpent of Space, 
called " the great Sea." " In the beginning, the Alhim created the 
heavens and the earth; the 6 (Sephiroth). . . . They created six, and 
on these all things are based. And those (six) depend upon the seven 
forms of the cranium up to the Dignity of all Dignities."*** 

Now Wind, Air and Spirit have ever been synonymous with every 
nation. Pneuma (Spirit) and Anemos (the wind) with the Greeks, 
Spiritus and Ventus with the Latins, were convertible terms even if 
dissociated from the original idea of the breath of life. In the " Forces " 
of Science we see but the material effect of the spiritual effect of one 
or the other of the four primordial Elements, transmitted to us by the 
4th Race, as we shall transmit Ether (or rather the gross subdivision 
of it) in its fulness to the Sixth Root Race. This is explained in the 
text of this and the following Book. 

" Chaos " is called senseless by the ancients, because it represented 
and contained in itself (Chaos and Space being synonymous) all the 
Elements in their rudimentary, undifferentiated State. They made of 
Ether, the fifth element, the synthesis of the other four; for the Aether 
of the Greek philosophers is not its dregs — of which indeed they 

438. Ntto Aspects of Life, bj Henry Part II, VoL H, "Ancient EHvisiont and the 
Pratt, M. D. Myatic Numbers." 

429. Sipkrak DMenimta, i, I 16. See 



THE UNION O? CHAOS AND SPIRIT 343 

knew more than science does now — which are rightly enough sup- 
posed to act as an agent for many forces that manifest on Earth. 
Their Aether was the Akaia of the Hindus; the Ether accepted in 
physics is but oat of its subdivisions, on our plane, — the Astral Light 
of the Kabalists with all its evil as well as good effects. 

On account of the Essence of Aether, or the Unseen Space, being 
held divine as the supposed veil of Deity, it was regarded as the medium 
between this life and the next one. The ancients considered that when 
the directing active " Intelligences " (the gods) retired from any por- 
tion of Ether in our Space — the four realms which they superintend 
— then that particular place was left in the possession of evil, so called 
by reason of the absence of the Good from it. 

The existence of spirit in the common mediator, the ether, is denied by mater- 
ialism; while theology makes of it a personal god. But the Kabalist holds 
that both arc wrong, saying that in ether, the elements represent but matter — the 
blind cosmic forces of nature; while Spirit represents the intelligence which 
directs them. The Aryan, Hermetic, Orphic, and Pythagorean cosmogonical doc- 
trines, as well as those of Sanchoniathon and Berosus, are all based upon one 
irrefutable formula, viz., that the aether and chaos, or, in the Platonic language, 
mind and matter, were the two primeval and eternal principles of the universe, 
utterly independent of anything else. The former was the all-vivifying intel- 
lectual principle ; the chaos, a shapeless liquid principle, without " form or sense," 
from the union of which two sprang into existence the universe, or rather the 
universal world, the first androgynous deity — the chaotic matter becoming its 
body, and ether its soul. According to the phraseology of a Fragment of 
Hermeias, *' chaos, from this union with spirit, obtaining sense, shone with pleas- 
ure, and thus was produced the Protogonos (the first-bom) light."** This is 
the universal trinity, based on the metaphysical conceptions of the ancients, who, 
reasoning by analogy, made of man, who is a compound of intellect and matter, 
the microcosm of the macrocosm, or great universe.**^ 

" Nature abhors Vacuum " said the Peripatetics, who comprehended 
perhaps, though materialists in their way, why Demokritos, with his 
instructor Leukippos, taught that the first principles of all things con- 
tained in the Universe were atoms and a vacuum. The latter means 
simply latent Deity or force; which, before its first manifestation when 
it became will — communicating the first impulse to these atoms — 
was the great Nothingness, Ain-Soph, or no-thing; was, therefore, 
to every sense, a Void — or Chaos. 

That Chaos, however, became the " Soul of the World," according to 
Plato and the Pythagoreans. According to Hindu teaching, Deity in 
the shape of Aether (Akasa) pervades all things; and it was called 

430. DmmMldot, in the " Theogony," calla it Dis, "the disposer of all things." Cory, 
Ancient PragmtnU, p. 314. 430a. I sis Unveiled, I, 341. 



334 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

(14.) From Self i&tmanah) he created mind, (1) which is and is not; 
(2) and from mind. Ego-ism (Self -Consciousness) the ruler; (3) the Lord. 

(1.) The mind is Manas. Medhatithi, the commentator, justly ob- 
serves here that it is the reverse of this and shows already interpola- 
tion and rearranging; for it is Manas that springs from Ahamkara or 
(Universal) Self-Consciousness, as Manas in the microcosm springs 
from Mahat, or Mahd-Buddhi (Buddhi, in man). For Manas is dual, 
and as shown and translated by Colebrooke, " is serving both for sense 
and action, is an organ by affinity, being cognate with the rest." " The 
rest " means, here, that Manas, our fifth principle (the fifth, because 
the body was named the first, which is the reverse of the true philo- 
sophical order) **^ is in affinity both with Atma-Buddhi and witfi the 
lower four principles. Hence, our teaching: namely, that Manas fol- 
lows Atma-Buddhi to Devachan, and that the lower (dregs, the resi- 
due of) Manas remains with Kama-rupa, in Limbus, or Kama-loka, 
the abode of the " Shells." 

(2.) Such is the meaning of Manas, which " is, and is not." 
(3.) Medhatithi translates it as " the one conscious of the I," or Ego, 
not " ruler," as the Orientalists do. Thus they translate verse 16 : 

He also, having made the subtile parts of those six [the Great Self and the 
five organs of sense] of unmeasured brightness, to enter into the elements of 
Self (Atmamdtrdsu) created all beings. 

When, according to Medhatithi, it ought to read tnatra-Chit instead 
of " Atmamatrasu," and thus be made to say : — 

He having pervaded the subtile parts of those six, of unmeasured brightness, 
by elements of self, created all beings. 

This latter reading must be the correct one, since he, the Self, is what 
we call Atma, and thus constitutes the seventh principle, the synthesis 
of the '' six." Such is also the opinion of the editor of Manava-dharma 
Sastra, who seems to have intuitionally entered far deeper into the 
spirit of the philosophy than has the translator of the Ordinances 
of Manu, the late Dr. Bumell. For he hesitates little between the text 
of Kulluka and the Commentaries of Medhatithi. Rejecting the tan- 
m&tra, or subtle elements, and the atmamatrasu of Kulluka, he says, 
applying the principles to the Cosmic Self: " The six appear rather to 
be the manas plus the five principles of Ether, air, fire, water, 
earth ; " " having united five portions of these six with the spiritual ele- 
ment [the seventh] he [thus] created all existing things ; " dtmamdira 
is therefore the spiritual atom as opposed to the elementary, not reflec- 
tive "elements of himself." Thus he corrects the translation of verse — 

406. Vide A. Coke Burnell'i tnmtUtion, edited by ^d. W. Hopkins, Pr. D. 



TH0 SEVEN PRAKMTIS 



335 



(17.) As the subtile elements of bodily forms of This One depend on these 
siXf so the wise call his form garira [Sarira]. 

— and he says that " Elements " mean here portions or parts (or prin- 
ciples), which reading is borne out by verse 19, which says: — 

(19.) This non-eternal [Universe] arises then from the Eternal, by means of 
the subtile elements of forms of those seven very glorious principles (purusha). 

Commenting upon which, according to Medhatithi, the Editor re- 
marks that " the five elements plus mind (Manas) and Self-Conscious- 
ness (Ahamkara*®*) are meant;" "subtle elements," as before (mean- 
ing) " five portions of form " (or principles). For verse 20 shows it, 
when saying of these (five elements, or) "five portions of form" (riipa, 
plus Manas and Self -Consciousness) that they constitute the "seven 
purusha," or principles, called in the Puranas the " Seven Prakritis." 

Moreover, these " five elements " or " five portions " are spoken of 

in verse 27 as " those which are called the atomic destructible portions " 

— therefore " distinct from the atoms of the nyaya." 

This creative Brahma, issuing from the mundane or golden egg, unites 
in himself both the male and the female principles. He is, in short, the 
same as all the creative Protologoi. Of Brahma, however, it could 

not be said, as of Dionysos : 'VpumJyovov ii/^mj rplyovov BoKxdov •'Avoicra 

''Aypwv 6fifnjTov Kpwfuov iucipoyra ilfiop(l>oy* — a lunar Jehovah — Bacchus 
truly, with David dancing nude before his symbol in the ark — because 
no licentious Dionysia were ever established in his name and honor. All 
such public worship was exoteric, and the great universal symbols were 
distorted universally, as those of Krishna are now by the Vallaba- 
charyas of Bombay, the followers of the infant god. But are these 
popular gods the true Deity f Are they the Apex and synthesis of the 
sevenfold creation, man included? Never! Each and all are one of 
the nmgs of that septenary ladder of Divine Consciousness, pagan as 
Christian. For Ain-Soph also is said to manifest through the Seven 
Letters of Jehovah's name who, having usurped the place of the Un- 
known Limitless, was given by his devotees his Seven Angels of the 
Presence — his Seven Principles. Yet they are mentioned in almost 
every school. In the pure Sankhya philosophy mahat, ahamkdra, and 
the five tanmatras are called the seven Prakritis (or Natures), and they 
are counted from Mahd-Buddhi or Mahat down to Earth.*®* 

407. Ahamkdro, u uniTenal Self-Con- nant/' in darkness. It belongs to Heav- 

sciousness, lias a triple aspect, as also Manas. en and Klirth, and assumes the properties 

For this conception of " I" or one's Bgo, of either. 

b either jattva, "pure (psietude," or appears 408. See SAnkhya KArikd III, and Com- 

as rajas, ** active/' or remains tanuu, "stag- mentaries. 



336 



THE SECRET DOCTRINE 



Nevertheless, however disfigured for Rabbinical purposes is the 
original Blohistic version by Ezra, however repulsive at times even the 
esoteric meaning in the Hebrew scrolls, which is far more so than its 
outward veil or cloaking may be*®* — once the Jehovistic portions are 
eliminated, the Mosaic Books are found full of purely occult and price- 
less knowledge, especially in the first six chapters. 

Read by the aid of the Kabala one finds a matchless temple of occult 
truths, a well of deeply concealed beauty hidden under a structure, the 
visible architecture of which, its apparent symmetry notwithstanding, is 
unable to stand the criticism of cold reason, or to reveal its age, for it 
belongs to all the ages. There is more wisdom concealed under the ex- 
oteric fables of Puranas and Bible than in all the exoteric facts and 
science in the literature of the world, and more occult true Science, 
than there is of exact knowledge in all the academies. Or, in plainer 
and stronger language, there is as much esoteric wisdom in some por- 
tions of the exoteric Puranas and Pentateuch, as there is of nonsense 
and of designed childish fancy in it, when read only in the dead-letter 
murderous interpretations of great dogmatic religions, and especially 
of sects. 

Let anyone read the first verses of chapter i. of Genesis and reflect 
upon them. There " God " commands to another " god," who does his 
bidding — even in the cautious English Protestant translation of James 
the First's authorized edition. 

In the " beginning," the Hebrew language having no word to express 
the idea of Eternity,*^® " God " fashions the heaven and the Earth; and 
the latter is " without form and void," while the former is no Heaven 
in fact, but the " Deep," Chaos, with darkness upon its face.*** 

" And the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the Waters " 
(v. 2), or the great Deep of the Infinite Space. And this Spirit is 
NarShyana, or Vishnu. 



» 



409. See " The Holy of HoUes.' 

410. The word "eternity." by which 
Christian theologian! interpret the term " for 
ever and ever,** does not exist in the He> 
brew tongtie — either as a word or meaning. 
Onlcm, says Le Qerc, only imports a time 
when beginning or end is not known. It 
does not mean **infinit€ duration," and the 
word for rvtt in the Old Testament, only 
signifies a "long time." Nor is the term 
"eternity" used in the Christian sense in 
the Purinas. For in Viskm^ PurAna, it is 
clearly stated that by Eternity and Immor- 
tality only *' existence to the end of the 
Kalpa" is meant (Book 11. chap. viii). 



411. Orphic theogony is purely Oriental 
and Indian in its Spirit. The su c c essi ve 
transformations it has undergone, hare now 
separated it widely from the spirit of as* 
cient Cosmogony, as may be seen by com- 
paring it even with Hesiod's theogony. Yet 
the truly Aryan Hindu spirit breaks forth 
ev rywhere in both Hesiod's and the Orphic 
theogony. (See the remarkable work of 
James Darmestetcr, Cosmogonies ArytnntSt 
in his Bssais Oritntaus.) Thus the original 
Greek conception of Chaos is that of the 
Secret Wisdom Religion. In Hesiod, there- 
fore, (^aos is infinite, boundless, endless and 
beginningless in duration, an abstraction at 



DARKNESS, IS UGHT 337 

" And God said, Let there be a firmament. . . ." (v. 6), and " God," 
the second, obeyed and " made the firmament " (v. 7). "And God said 
let there be light," and " there was light." Now the latter does not 
mean light at all, but in the Kabala, the androgyne "Adam Kadmon," 
or Sephira (Spiritual light), for they are one; or, according to the 
Chaldaean "Book of Numbers/' the secondary angels, the first being 
the Elohim who are the aggregate of that "fashioning" god. For to 
whom are those words of command addressed? And who is it who 
commands? That which commands is the eternal Law, and he who 
obeys, the Blohim, the known quantity acting in and with x, or the co- 
efficient of the unknown quantity, the Forces of the one Force. All 
this is Occultism, and is found in the archaic stanzas. It is perfectly 
immaterial whether we call these " Forces " the Dhyan Chohans, or 
the Ophanim, as St. John does. 

" The one Universal Light, which to Man is Darkness, is ever exist- 
ent," says the Chaldaean "Book of Numbers." From it proceeds per- 
iodically the Energy^ which is reflected in the " Deep " or Chaos, the 
store-house of future worlds, and, once awakened, stirs up and fruc- 
tifies the latent Forces, which are the ever present eternal potentialities 
in it. Then awake anew the Brahmas and Buddhas — the co-eternal 
Forces — and a new Universe springs into being. . . . 

In the Sepher Jezireh, the Kabalistic Book of Creation, the author 
has evidently repeated the words of Manu. In it, the Divine Substance 
is represented as having alone existed from the eternity, botmdless and 
absolute ; and as having emitted from itself the Spirit*" " One is the 
Spirit of the living God, blessed be Its name, which liveth for ever! 
Voice, Spirit, and Word, this is the Holy Spirit;"*^' and this is the 
Kabalistic abstract Trinity, so unceremoniously anthropomorphized 
by the Christian Fathers. From this triple One emanated the whole 
Kosmos. First from One emanated number Two, or Air (the Father), 
the creative element; and then number Three, Water (the Mother), 
proceeded from the air ; Ether or Fire completes the mystic four, the 
Arba-il.*^* When the Concealed of the Concealed wanted to reveal 
Himself, he first made a point (primordial point, or the first Sephir- 
oth, air, or Holy Ghost), shaped into a sacred form (the ten Seph- 

tbe same time at a ritible presence. (Spacs Substance: Parabrahm and Mfilaprakriti are 
filled with darkness, whicn is primordial mat- one in essence. Therefore, Cosmic Ideation 
ter in its pre<osmic state. For in its etymo- and Cosmic Substance in their primal char- 
logical sense. Chaos is Space, according to acter are one also. 

Aristotle, and Space is lA# ever Unseen and 413. Stphtr J t girth, chapter 1, Mish- 

Unknowable Deity in our philosophy. na ix. 

412. The maniftsUd Spirit; Absolute, 414. Ibid. It is from Arha that Abram is 

Divine Spirit is one with absolute Divine made to come. 



348 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

7 weeks, 7 years, 7 times, and 7000 years that the world has been. The Holy 
is the seventh of all, etc (p. 415). 

This, besides showing a strange identity with the cosmogony of the 
Puranas {e,g,, Vishnu Purana, 1st Book), corroborates with regard to 
number seven, all our teachings as briefly given in "Esoteric Buddhism/* 

The Hindus have an endless series of allegories to express this idea« 

In the primordial Chaos, before it became developed into the Seven 
Oceans (Sapta Samudra) — emblematical of the seven gunds (condi- 
tioned qualities) composed of trigunas (Sattva, Rajas and Tamas, see 
Puranas) — lie latent both Amrita (immortality) and Visha (poison, 
death, evil). This allegory is fotmd in the " Churning of the Ocean " 
by the gods. Amrita is beyond any guna, for it is unconditioned per 
se; yet when fallen into the phenomenal creation it got mixed up with 
Evil,, Chaos, with latent theos in it, and before Kosmos was evolved. 
Hence, one finds Vishnu — standing here for eternal Law — periodi- 
cally calling forth Kosmos into activity — " churning out of the prim- 
itive Ocean (boundless Chaos) the Amrita of Eternity, reserved only 
for the gods and devas ; and he has to employ in the task Nagas and 
Asuras — demons in exoteric Hinduism. The whole allegory is highly 
philosophical, and we find it repeated in every philosophical System. 
Plato having fully embraced the ideas of Pythagoras — who had 
brought them from India — compiled and published them in a form 
more intelligible than the mysterious numerals of the Greek Sage. 
Thus the Kosmos is " the Son " with Plato, having for his father and 
mother the Divine Thought and Matter.**^ 

" The Egyptians," says Dunlap,**' " distinguish between an older and 
younger Horus ; the former the brother of Osiris, the latter the son of 
Osiris and Isis." The first is the Idea of the world remaining in the 
Demiurgic Mind, " bom in darkness before the creation of the world." 
The second Horus is this " Idea " going forth from the Logos, becom- 
ing clothed with matter, and assuming an eternal existence.*** 

" The Mundane God, eternal, boundless, young and old, of winding 
form," *** say the Chaldaean Oracles, 

This " winding form " is a figure to express the vibratory motion of 
the Astral Light, with which the ancient priests were perfectly well 
acquainted, thou^ its name was invented by the Martinists. 

Now Cosmolatry has the finger of scorn pointed at its superstitions 
by modem Science, which ought, however, as advised by a French 
savant, before laughing at it " to remodel entirely its own system of 

441. Platardi, Isis and OtWis, Wi. 443. MoTert* Di€ Pkdnieur, 268. 

442. Spirit History of Mam, p. 88. 444. Cory. Ancient Pragments, 24a 



THE MANY ARE ONE 349 

cosmo-pneumatological education." Satis eloquentiae, sapientiae par- 
vum. Cosmolatry like Pantheism may be made to yield in its ultimate 
expression the words applied to Vishnu: 

He is only the ideal Cause of the Potencies to be created in the work of crea- 
tion; and from him proceed the potencies to be created, after they have become 
the real cause. Save that one ideal cause, there is no other to which the world 
can be referred. . . . Through the potency of that cause, every created thing 
comes by its proper nature.*** 



§ V 
ON THE HIDDEN DEITY, ITS SYMBOLS AND GLYPHS 

The Logos or Creative deity, the "Word made Flesh," of every 
religion, has to be traced to its ultimate source and Essence. In India, 
it is a Proteus of 1008 divine names and aspects in each of its personal 
transformations, from Brahma-Purusha down through the Seven dimne 
Rishis and ten ^^mi-divine Prajapati (also Rishis) to the divine-human 
Avatars. The same puzzling problem of the " One in many " and the 
multitude in One, is found in other Pantheons, in the Egyptian, the 
Greek and the Chaldaeo-Judaic, the latter having made confusion still 
more confused by presenting its Gods as euhemerizations, in the shapes 
of Patriarchs. The latter are now accepted by those who reject Rom- 
ulus as a myth, and are represented as living and historical Entities. 
Verbum satis sapienti. 

In the Zohar, En-Soph is also the One, and the infinite Unity. This 
was known to the very few learned Fathers of the Church, who were 
aware that Jehovah was but a third rate potency and no "highest" 
God. But while complaining bitterly of the Gnostics and saying : " our 
Heretics hold . . . that Propator is known but to the Only begotten 
Son,*** [who is Brahma among the rest] that is to the mind" (noi«), 
Irenaeus never mentioned that the Jews did the same in their real secret 
books. Valentinus, " the profoundest doctor of the Gnosis," held that 
" there was a perfect aion who existed before Bythos, or Buthon [the 
first father of unfathomable nature, which is the second Logos] called 
Propator." It is thus Aion, who springs as a Ray from Ain-Soph 
(who does not create) ^ and Aion, who creates, or through whom, 
rather, everything is created, or evolves. For as the Basilidians taught, 

445. Vishnu PurAna, I, iv; Original San- livara, the Logos, m he is called now by 
skrii TtxU, Part IV, pp. 32, 33. Mr. T. Subba Rao, of Madraa. (See hia 

446. As Miilaprakriti is known only to Bkagavad^tS I^ecturea.) 



350 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

"there was a supreme god, Abraxas, by whom was created mind" 
{Mahat, in Sanskrit, No%^s in Greek). "From Mind proceeded the 
word. Logos, from the word. Providence [Divine Light, rather], then 
from it Virtue and Wisdom in Principalities, Powers, Angels, etc., 
etc." By these (Angels) the 365 Aeons were created. "Amongst the 
lowest, indeed, and those who made this world, he [Basilides] sets 
last of all the God of the Jews, whom he denies to be God [and very 
rightly], affirming he is one of the angels." (Ibid.) Here, then, we 
find the same system as in the Puranas, wherein the Incomprehensible 
drops a seed, which becomes the golden egg, from which Brahma is 
produced. Brahma produces Mahat, etc., etc. True Esoteric philo- 
sophy, however, speaks neither of "creation" nor of "evolution" in 
the sense the exoteric religions do. All these personified Powers are 
not evolutions from one another, but so many aspects of the one and 
sole manifestation of the Absolute all. The same system as the gnostic 
prevails in the Sephirothal aspects of Ain-Soph, yet, as these aspects 
are in Space and Time, a certain order is maintained in their successive 
appearances. Therefore, it becomes impossible not to take notice of 
the great changes that the Zohar has tmdergone under the handling of 
generations of Christian Mystics. For, even in the metaphysics of the 
Talmud, the "lower Face" (or "Lesser Cotmtenance"), the micro- 
prosopus, in fact, could never be placed on the plane of the same 
abstract ideal as the Higher, or " Greater Countenance," macroprosopus. 
The latter is, in the Chaldaean Kabala, a pure abstraction ; the Word 
or Locos, or Dabar (in Hebrew), which Word, though it becomes in 
fact a plural number, or " Words " — D(a)B(a)RiM, when it reflects 
itself, or falls into the aspect of a Host (of angels, or Sephiroth, " num- 
bers ") is still collectively One, and on the ideal plane a nought — O, 
a " No-thing." It is without form or being, " with no likeness with 
an\thing else."**' And even Philo calls the Creator, the Logos who 
stands next God, " the Second God," and " the second God who is his 
(Highest God's) Wisdom." **■ Deity is not God. It is nothing, and 
DARKNESS, It IS namelcss, and therefore called AinSoph — " the word 
Ayin meaning nothing." **• The " Highest God " (the unmanifested 
Logos) is its Son. 

Nor arc most of the gnostic systems, which come down to us muti- 
lated by the Church Fathers, anything better than the distorted shells 
of the original speculations. Nor were they open to the public or reader, 
at any time ; i.e., had their hidden meaning or esotcricism been revealed, 
it would have been no more an esoteric teaching, and this could never be. 
Alone Markos (the chief of the Marcosians, 2nd century), who taught 

447. Fnnck. Vie Kai^h^l^ p, \26^ 44«L Ptiilo, Om#^. H S^lmi. 

44«, Sc« FniDck. ZW X'«^^«i«. p. ISX S«c also I xit. ** TWofoay of tW Crettivc Coda." 



THE GNOSTIC IDEA 351 

that deity had to be viewed under the symbol of four syllables, gave out 
more of the esoteric truths than any other Gnostic. But even he was 
never well understood. For it is only on the surface or dead letter of 
his Revelation that it appears that God is a quaternary, to wit : " the 
Ineffable, the Silence, the Father, and Truth," — in reality it is quite 
erroneous, and divulges only one more esoteric riddle. This teaching 
of Markos was that of the early Kabalists and ours. For he makes of 
Deity, the number 30 in 4 syllables, which, translated esoterically, means 
a Triad or Triangle, and a Quaternary or a square, in all seven, which, 
on the lower plane made the seven divine or secret letters of which the 
God-name is composed. This requires demonstration. In his " Revela- 
tion," speaking of divine mysteries expressed by means of letters and 
numbers, Markos relates how the " Supreme Tetrad came down unto 
me (him) from the region which cannot be seen nor named, in a female 
form, because the world would have been unable to bear her appearing 
under a male figure," and revealed to him " the generation of the uni- 
verse, untold before to either gods or men." 

This first sentence already contains a double meaning. Why should 
a female figure be more easily borne or listened to by the world than a 
male figure ? On the very face of it this appears nonsensical. Withal 
it is quite simple and clear to one who is acquainted with the mystery- 
language. Esoteric Philosophy, or the Secret Wisdom, was symbolized 
by a female form, while a male figure stood for the Unveiled mystery. 
Hence, the world not being ready to receive, could not bear it, and the 
Revelation of Markos had to be given allegorically. Then he writes : 

When first the Inconceivable, the Beingless and Sexless [the Kabalistic Ain- 
Soph] began to be in labor [i.e., when the hour of manifesting Itself had 
struck] and desired that Its Ineffable should be born [the first Logos, or Aeon, 
or Aion], and its invisible should be clothed with form, its mouth opened and 
uttered the word like unto itself. This word [logos] manifested itself in the 
form of the Invisible One. The uttering of the [ineffable] name [through the 
word] came to pass in this manner. He [the Supreme Logos] uttered the first 
word of his name, which is a syllable of four letters. Then the second syllable 
was added, also of four letters. Then the third, composed of ten letters ; and 
after this the fourth, which contains twelve letters. The whole name consists 
thus of thirty letters and of four syllables. Each letter has its own accent 
and way of writing, but neither understands nor ever beholds that form of 
the whole Name, — no; not even the power of the letter that stands next to 
Itself [to the Beingless and the Inconceivable].^ 

All these sounds when united are the collective Beingless, unbegotten Aeon, 

450. Tlvarm, or the Logos, cannot see Para* lecturer in the Four Lectures on Bkagavad- 
brahmam, but only Mulaprakriti, says the gUA. (See Theosophist, Feb. 1887) 



352 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

and these are the Angds that are ever beholding the face of the Father^ [the 
Logos, the ''second God," who stands next God, "the inconceivable," according 
to Philo]. 

This is as plain as ancient esoteric secrecy would make it. It is as 
Kabalistic, but less veiled than the Zohar in which the mystic names 
or attributes are also four syllabled, twelve, forty-two, and even sev- 
enty-two syllabled words ! The Tetrad shows to Markos the truth in 
the shape of a naked woman, and letters every limb of that figure, 
calling her head O, her neck i^, shoulders and hands r, and X, etc., etc 
In this Sephira is easily recognized, the Crown (Kether) or head being 
numbered one; the brain or Chochmah, 2; the heart, or Intelligence 
(Binah), 3; and the other seven Sephiroth representing the limbs of 
the body. The Sephirothal Tree is the Universe, and Adam Kadmon 
represents it in the West, as Brahma represents it in India. 

Throughout, the 10 Sephiroth are represented as divided into the 
three higher, or the spiritual Triad, and the lower Septenary. The true 
Esoteric meaning of the sacred number seven is cleverly veiled in the 
Zohar; yet was betrayed by the double way of writing " in the begin- 
ning " or Be-resheeth, and Be-raishath, the latter the " Higher, or 
Upper Wisdom." As shown by Mr. Macgregor Mathers in his 
Kabbalah,^* and in the Qabbalah of Mr. I. Myer,*»* both of these 
Kabalists being supported by the best ancient authorities, these words 
have a dual and secret meaning. Braisheeth bara Elohim means that 
the six, over which stands the seventh Sephiroth, belong to the lower 
material class, or, as the author says : " Seven . . . are applied to the 
Lower Creation, and three to the spiritual man, the Heavenly Proto- 
typic or first Adam." 

When the Theosophists and Occultists say that God is no Being, for 
It is nothing, No-Thing, they are more reverential and religiously 
respectful to the Deity than those who call God a He, and thus make 
of Him a gigantic Male. 

He who studies the Kabala will soon find the same idea in the ul- 
timate thought of its authors, the earlier and great Hebrew Initiates, 
who got this secret Wisdom at Babylonia from the Chaldaean Hiero- 
phants, while Moses got his in Egypt. The Zohar cannot well be 
judged by its after translations in Latin and other tongues, as all those 
ideas were, of course, softened and made to fit in with the views 
and policy of its Christian arrangers ; but in truth its ideas arc identical 
with those of all other religious systems. The various Cosmogonies 
show that the Archaic Universal Soul was held by every nation as 

451. Tbe **SeTen Anfels of the Face/' with tbe Chriidafifl. 
452. Page 47. 453. Ihifle 234. 



THE EGYPTIAN VERSION 353 

the " Mind " of the Demiurgic Creator ; and that it was called the 
"Mother," Sophia with the Gnostics (or the female Wisdom), the 
Sephira with the Jews, Sarasvati or Vach with the Hindus, the Holy 
Ghost being a female Principle. 

Hence, born from it, the Kurios or Logos was, with the Greeks, 
the "God, mind" (nous). "Now Koros (Kurios) signifies the pure 
and unmixed nature of intellect — wisdom," says Plato in Kratylos; 
and Kurios is Mercury, the Divine Wisdom, and " Mercury is the Sol " 
(Sun),*** from whom Thoth-Hermes received this divine Wisdom. 
While, then, the Logoi of all countries and religions are correlative 
(in their sexual aspects) with the female Soul of the World or the 
" Great Deep " ; the deity, from which these two in one have their 
being, is ever concealed and called the " Hidden One," connected only 
indirectly with Creation,*** as it can only act through the Dual Force 
emanating from the Eternal Essence. Even Asklepios, called the 
" Savior of all," is identical, according to ancient classics, with Ptah, 
the Egyptian Creative Intellect (or Divine Wisdom), and with Apollo, 
Baal, Adonis and Herakles;*** and Ptah is, in one of its aspects, the 
" Anima Mundi," the Universal Soul of Plato, the " Divine Spirit " 
of the Egyptians, the " Holy Ghost " of the early Christians and 
Gnostics, and the Akaia of the Hindus, and even, in its lower aspect, 
the Astral Light. For Ptah was originally the " God of the Dead," 
he in whose bosom they were received, hence the Limbus of the Greek 
Christians, or the Astral Light. It is far later that Ptah was classed 
with the Sun-gods, his name signifying " he who opens," as he is shown 
to be the first to unveil the face of the dead mummy, to call the soul 
to life in his bosom.^^'^ Kneph, the Eternal Unrevealed, is represented 
by the snake-emblem of eternity encircling a water-urn, with its head 
hovering over the "waters" which it incubates with its breath — an- 
other form of one and the same idea of " Darkness," its ray moving on 
the waters, etc. As " Logos-Soul," this permutation is called Ptah ; 
as Logos-Creator, he becomes Imhetep, his son, "the god of the 
handsome face." In their primitive characters these two were the 
first Cosmic Duad, Nut, "space or Sky" and Nu, "the primordial 
Waters," the Androgyne Unity, above whom was the Concealed Breath 
of Kneph. And all of them had the aquatic animals and plants sacred 
to them, the ibis, the swan, the goose, the crocodile, and the lotus. 

Returning to the Kabalistic deity, this Concealed Unity is then 
qiDT^K = tA tov = air€ipov. Endless, Boundless, non-existent, PN 

454. Arnobius, ri, xiL 456. See DunUp'i Sdd, tht Mysteries of 

455. We ate the term as one accepted and Adoni, pp. 23 and 95. 
sanctioned by use, and therefore more com* 

prehensible to the reader. 457. See Maspero's Bulaq Museum, 



354 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

80 long as the Absolute is within Oulom,^^ the boundless and termless 
time; as such, En-Soph cannot be the Creator or even the modeler of 
the Universe, nor can he be Aur (light). Therefore &i-Soph is also 
Darkness. The immutably Infinite and the absolutely Boundless can 
neither will, think, nor act To do this it has to become finite, and U 
does so, by its ray penetrating into the mundane egg — infinite space — 
and emanating from it as a finite god. All this is left to the ray latent 
in the one. When the period arrives, the absolute will expands natur- 
ally the force within it, according to the Law of which it is the inner 
and ultimate Essence. The Hebrews did not adopt the egg as a 
symbol, but they substituted for it the " Duplex heavens," for, trans- 
lated correctly, the sentence " God made the heavens and the earth " 
would read : " In and out of his own essence as a womb [the mun- 
dane egg], God created the two heavens." But the Christians have 
chosen as the symbol of their Holy Ghost, the dove. 

" Whoever acquaints himself witii in the Mercaba and the lahgash 
(secret speech or incantation), will learn the secret of secrets." 
Lahgash is nearly identical in meaning with Vach, the hidden power of 
the Mantras. 

When the active period has arrived, from within the eternal essence 
of Ain-Soph, comes forth Sephira, the active Power, called the Primor- 
dial Point, and the Crown, Kether. It is only through her that the 
" Un-bounded Wisdom " could give a concrete form to the abstract 
Thought. Two sides of the upper triangle by which the ineffable 
Essence and the universe — its manifested body — are symbolized, the 
right side and the base are composed of unbroken lines ; the third, the 
left side, is dotted. It is through the latter that emerges Sephira. 
Spreading in every direction, she finally encompasses the whole tri- 
angle. In this emanation the triple triad is formed. From the invisible 
Dew falling from the higher Uni-triad (thus leaving 7 sephiroth only), 
the " Head " Sephira creates primeval waters, i. e., Chaos takes shape. 
It is the first stage toward the solidification of spirit which through 
various modifications will produce earth. " It requires earth and water 
to make a living soul/' says Moses. It requires the image of an aquatic 
bird to connect it with water, the female element of procreation with 
the egg and the bird that fecundates it 

When Sephira emerges like an active power from within the latent 
Deity, she is female; when she assumes the office of a creator, she 
becomes a male ; hence, she is androgyne. She is the " Father and 



45S. With th« andent Jew*, as ■bown hj exist in the Hebrew tongtw with the 

Ltf Oerc, the word Ouiom me«nt only a time kic, for instance, applied bj the Ved4ntins 

whose bcffinninc or end is not known. The to Parabrahm. 
term ** eternity.** properly speaUnc. did not 



INTERNATIONAL CORREI*ATlON 01^ GODS 355 

Mother Aditi," of the Hindu Cosmogony and of the Secret Doctrine. 
If the oldest Hebrew scrolls had been preserved, the modem Jehovah- 
worshiper would have found that many and uncomely were the sym- 
bols of the creative god. The frog in the moon, typical of his generative 
character, was the most frequent. All the birds and animals now held 
"unclean" in the Bible had been the sjrmbols of the Deity in days of 
old. It was because they were too sacred that a mask of uncleanness 
was placed over them, in order to preserve them from destruction. The 
brazen serpent was not a bit more poetical than the goose or swan, if 
sjrmbols are to be accepted d la lettre. 

In the words of the Zohar: " The Indivisible Point, which has no 
limit and cannot be comprehended because of its purity and brightness, 
expanded from without, forming a brightness that served the indivisible 
Point as a veil " ; yet the latter also "could not be viewed in conse- 
quence of its immeasurable light. It too expanded from without, and 
this expansion was its garment. Thus through a constant upheaving 
[motion] finally the world originated." **• The Spiritual substance sent 
forth by the Infinite Light is the first Sephira or Shekinah: Sephira 
exoterically contains all the other nine Sephiroth in her. Esoterically 
she contains but two,**^ Chochmah or Wisdom, "a masculine, active 
potency whose divine name is Jah ( t\^ )," and Binah, a feminine 
passive potency. Intelligence, represented by the divine name Jehovah 
( ni«T ) ; which two potencies form, with Sephira the third, the Jew- 
ish trinity or the Crown, Kkther. These two Sephiroth called Father, 
Abba, and Mother, Amona, are the duad or the double-sexed logos 
from which issued the other seven Sephiroth. (See Zohar,) This 
first Jewish triad (Sephira, Chochmah, and Binah) is the Hindu Tri- 
murti,*^ However veiled, even in the Zohar, and more still in the 
exoteric Pantheon of India, every particular connected with one is 
reproduced in the other. The Praj&pati are the Sephiroth. Ten with 
Brahma they dwindle to seven, when the Trimurti, and the Kabalistic 
triad, are separated from the rest. The seven Builders (Creators) be- 
come the seven Prajapati, or the seven Rishis, in the same order as 
the Sephiroth become the Creators ; then the Patriarchs, etc. In both 
Secret Systems, the One Universal Essence is incomprehensible and 
inactive in its absoluteness, and can be connected with the building 
of the Universe only in an indirect way. In both, the primeval Male- 
female or androgynous Principle, and their ten and seven Emanations 
( Brahma- Viraj and Aditi-Vach on the one part and the Elohim-Jeho- 
vah, or Adam-Adami (Adam Kadmon) and Sephira Eve on the other), 

459. Zohar I, 20a. 
460. In the lodian Pantheon the double- seven "mind-bom" tons are the primeyal 
•exed Logos is Brahm&, the Creator, whose Rishis — the *' Builders." 



356 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

with their Prajapati and Sephiroth, represent in their totality, first of 
all the Archetypal man, the Proto-logos; and only in their secondary 
aspect do they become Cosmic powers, and astronomical or sidereal 
bodies. If Aditi is the mother of the gods, Deva-Matri, Eve is the 
mother of all living; they are the Sakti or generative power in their 
female aspect of the " Heavenly man," and they are all compound 
Creators. Says a " Gupta Vidyi " Sutra : 

In the beginning, a ray issuing from Paramarthika {the one and only true 
existence), it became manifested in Vyavaharika (conventional existence) which 
was used as a V&han to descend into the Universal Mother, and to cause her 
to expand (swell, hrih). 

And in the Zohar it is stated : 

The Infinite Unity, formless and without similitude, after the form of the 
heavenly man was created, used it The Unknown Light^ (Darkness) used the 
HH^^y DTK (heavenly form) as a chariot niD*lD through which to descend* 
and wished to be called by this form, which is the sacred name Jehovah. 

As the Zohar says: 

In the beginning was the Will of the King, prior to any other existence. . . . 
It [the Will] sketched the forms of all things that had been concealed but now 
came into view. And there went forth as a sealed secret from the head of Ain 
Soph, a nebulous spark of matter, without shape or form. . . . Life is drawn 
from below, and from above the source renews itself, the sea is always full and 
spreads its waters everywhere. 

Thus the deity is compared to a shoreless sea, to water which is " the 
fountain of life."*** "The seventh palace, the fountain of life, is the 
first in the order from above." *•• Hence the Kabalistic tenet on the 
lips of the very Kabalistic Solomon, who says in Proverbs ix. 1: 
" Wisdom hath builded her house ; it hath hewn out its seven pillars." 
Whence then, all this identity of ideas, if there was no primeval Uni- 
versal Revelation? The few points shown are like a few straws in 
a hayrick, in comparison to that which will be shown as the work pro- 
ceeds. If we turn to that most hazy of all Cosmogonies — the Chinese, 
even there the same idea is found. Tsi-tsai (the Self-Existent) is 
the unknown Darkness, the root of the Wuliang-sheu (Boundless Age), 
Amitabha, and Tien (heaven) come later on. The "great Extreme" of 
Confucius gives the same idea, his "straws" notwithstanding. The 

461. Sayt IUl>bi Simeon: "Ah, comptni- wm Light' . . . and thii it the twofold 

ons, oompanions, nun as an emanation was man" (AusMUgt out dtm Sokar, pp. 13, 

both man and woman, as well on the aide of 15.) Light, then, in Genesis stood for die 

the ' Paiker ' as on the side of the ' Mother.* Androgyne Ray or '* Heavenly Man.** 

And this is the sense of the words: 'And 462. Zohar, iii, 290. 

Elohim spoke; Let there be Light, and it 463. Ibid, U, 261. 



ORNITHOI^OGICAI. SYMBOLS 357 

latter are a source of great amusement to the missionaries. These 
laugh at every " heathen " religion, despise and hate that of their 
brother Christians of other denominations, and yet one and all accept 
d la lettre their own Genesis, If we turn to Chaldaea we find in it 
Anu, the concealed deity, the One, whose name, moreover, shows it 
to be of Sanskrit origin. Anu, which means in Sanskrit "atom," 
aniyamsam aniyasam (smallest of the small), is a name of Parabrahm 
in the Vedantic philosophy; Parabrahm being described as smaller 
than the smallest atom, and greater than the greatest sphere or tuiiverse : 
"Anagraniyas and Mahaturuvat'* This is what George Smith gives 
as the first verses of the Akkadian Genesis*^** as found in the Cunei- 
form Texts on the "Laieres CoctUes." There also, we find Anu the 
passive deity or En-soph, 5 W, the Creator, the spirit of God (Sephira) 
moving on the face of the waters, hence water itself, and Hea, the 
Universal Soul or wisdom of the three combined. 
The first eight verses read thus : 

1. When above, were not raised the heavens; 

2. And below on the earth a plant had not grown up. 

3. The abyss had not broken its boundaries. 

4. The chaos (or water) Tiamat (the sea) was the producing mother of the 
whole of them. [This is the Cosmical Aditi and Sephira.] 

5. Those waters at the beginning were ordained but — 

6. A tree had not grown, a flower had not unfolded. 

7. When the gods had not sprung up, any one of them. 

8. A plant had not grown, and order did not exist 

This was the chaotic or ante-genetic period — the double Swan and 
the Dark Swan, which becomes white, when Light is created.*** 

The symbol chosen for the majestic ideal of the Universal Principle 
will seem little calculated to answer its sacred character. A goose, or 
even a swan, may appear unfit, no doubt, to represent the grandeur of 
the Spirit. Nevertheless, it must have had some deep occult meaning, 
since it figures not only in every cosmogony and world religion, but 
even was chosen by the medieval Christians, the Crusaders, as the 
vehicle of the Holy Ghost supposed to lead the army to Palestine, to 
wrench the Tomb of the Savior from the hands of the Saracen. If 
we are to credit Professor Draper's statement in his Intellectual 
Development of Europe, the Crusaders, led on by Peter the Hermit, 
were preceded, at the head of the army, by the Holy Ghost under 
the shape of a white gander in company of a goat. The Egyptian 

463«. Chatdean Account of Gengsis, page Arr in the popular fancy the Seven Riahia 

62 €t seq. of the Great Bear, who asaume that form 

464. The Seven Swans that are believed to to visit the locality where the Vedas were 

land from Heaven into Lake Manasarovara, written. 



358 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

God of Time, Seb, carries a goose on his head. Jupiter assumes the 
form of a swan, and Brahma also, because the root of all this is that 
mystery of mysteries — the Mundane Egg. (See preceding §.) 

One has to learn the reason of a symbol before one depreciates it. 
The dual element of Air and Water is that of the ibis, swan, goose 
and pelican, of crocodiles and frogs, lotus flowers and water lilies, etc. ; 
and the result is the choice of the most unseemly sjrmbols among the 
modem as much as the ancient mystics. Pan, the great god of nature, 
was generally figured in connexion with aquatic birds, geese especially, 
and so were other gods. If, later on, with the gradual degeneration 
of religion, the gods to whom geese were sacred, became Priapic 
deities, it does not stand to reason that water fowls were made sacred to 
Pan and other Phallic deities as some scoffers even of antiquity would 
have it ; *•* but that the abstract and divine power of procreative nature 
had become grossly anthropomorphized. Nor does the Swan of Leda 
show " Priapic doings and her enjoyment thereof," as Mr. Hargrave 
Jennings chastely expresses it ; for the myth is but another version of 
the same philosophical idea of cosmogony. Swans are frequently found 
associated with Apollo, as they are the emblems of water and fire (sun- 
light also), before the separation of the Elements. 

Our modem symbologists might profit by some remarks made by a 
well-known writer, Mrs. Lydia Maria Child. 

From time immemorial an emblem has been worshiped in Hindostan as the 
type of creation, or the origin of life. . . . Siva or the Mahadeva being not only 
the reproducer of human forms, but also the fructifying principle, the generative 
power that pervades the Universe. The maternal emblem is likewise a religious 
type. This reverence for the production of life, introduced into the worship 
of Osiris the sexual emblems. Is it strange that they regarded with reverence 
the great mystery of human birth? Were they impure thus to regard it? Or 
are we impure that do not so regard it? But no clean and thoughtful mind 
could so regard them. . . . We have traveled far, and unclean have been the 
paths, since those old Anchorites first spoke of God and the soul in the solemn 
depths of their first sanctuaries. Let us not smile at their mode of tracing the 
infinite and the incomprehensible Cause throughout all the mysteries of nature, 
le.st by so doing we cast the shadow of our own grossness on their patriarchal 
simplicity.*" 

465. See Petronii Satyrica, cxxxri 466. Progress of Religious Ideas, I, 17, H stq. 



THE EGG-BORN GOD 359 

§ VI 

THE MUNDANE EGG 

Whence this universal symbol? The Egg was incorporated as a 
sacred sign in the cosmogony of every people on the Earth, and was 
revered both on account of its form and its inner mystery. From the 
earliest mental conceptions of man, it was known as that which repre- 
sented most successfully the origin and secret of being. The gradual 
development of the imperceptible germ within the closed shell; the 
inward working, without any apparent outward interference of force, 
which from a latent nothing produced an active something, needing 
nought save heat; and which, having gradually evolved into a con- 
crete, living creature, broke its shell, appearing to the outward senses 
of all a self-generated, and self-created being — must have been a 
standing miracle from the beginning. 

The secret teaching explains the reason for this reverence by the 
Symbolism of the prehistoric races. The " First Cause " had no name 
in the beginnings. Later it was pictured in the fancy of the thinkers 
as an ever invisible, mysterious Bird that dropped an Egg into Chaos, 
which Egg becomes the Universe. Hence Brahm was called Kala- 
hansa, "the swan in (Space and) Time." He became the "Swan 
of Eternity," who lays at the beginning of each Mahamanvantara a 
" Golden Egg." It typifies the great Circle, or O, itself a symbol for 
the tmiverse and its spherical bodies. 

The second reason for its having been chosen as the symbolical 
representation of the Universe, and of our earth, was its form. It was 
a Circle and a Sphere ; and the oviform shape of our globe must have 
been known from the beginning of symbology, since it was so univers- 
ally adopted. The first manifestation of the Kosmos in the form of 
an egg was the most widely diffused belief of antiquity. As Bryant 
shows,**^ it was a symbol adopted among the Greeks, the Syrians, Per- 
sians, and Egyptians. In chap. liv. of the Egyptian Ritual, Seb, the 
god of Time and of the Earth, is spoken of as having laid an egg, or 
the Universe, " an egg conceived at the hour of the great one of the 
Dual Force." ^ 

Ra is shown like Brahma gestating in the Egg of the Universe. 
The deceased is "resplendent in the Egg of the land of mysteries 
(xxii, 1). For, this is "the Egg to which is given life among the gods 
(xlii, 14). "It is the Egg of the great clucking Hen, the Egg of Seb, 
who issues from it like a hawk" (liv, 1, 2, 3; Ixxvii, 1). 

With the Greeks the Orphic Egg is described by Aristophanes, 

467. iii, 165. 468. See Yeraes 2» 3, etc 






360 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

and was part of the Dionysiac and other mysteries, during which 
the Mundane Egg was consecrated and its significance explained; 
Porphyry showing it a representation of the world, ^Epfirp^evu 8i t4 
«ov KOKTfwv. Faber and Bryant have tried to show that the egg typi- 
fied the ark of Noah, which, unless the latter is accepted as purely 
allegorical and symbolical, is a wild belief. It can have typified the ark 
only as a synonym of the moon, the argha which carries the universal 
seed of life; but had surely nothing to do with the ark of the Bible. 
Anyhow, the belief that the universe existed in the beginning in the 
shape of an egg was general. And as Wilson has it: "A similar 
account of the first aggregation of the elements in the form of an egg 
is given in all the (Indian) Puranas, with the usual epithet Haima or 
Hiranya, * golden ' as it occurs in Manu." Hiranya, however, means 
" resplendent," " shining," rather than " golden," as proven by the 
great Indian scholar, the late Svami Dayanand Sarasvati, in his 
unpublished polemics with Professor Max Muller. As said in the 
Vishnu Purano: " Intellect (Mahat) . . . the (unmanifested) gross 
elements inclusive, formed an egg . . . and the lord of the uni- 
verse himself abided in it, in the character of Brahma. In that egg, 
O Brahmana, were the continents, and seas and mountains, the planets 
and divisions of the universe, the gods, the demons and mankind." *^ 
Both in Greece and in India the first visible male being, who united in 
himself the nature of cither sex, abode in the egg and issued from it 
This " first bom of the world " was Dionysos, with some Greeks ; the 
god who sprang from the mundane egg, and from whom the mortals 
and immortals were derived. The god Ra is shown in the Ritual ^^^ 
beaming in his egg (the Sun), and he starts off as soon as the god 
Shu (the Solar energy) awakens and gives him the impulse. " He 
is in the Solar egg, the egg to which is given life among the gods."*'* 
The solar god exclaims : " I am the creative soul of the celestial abyss. 
None sees my nest, none can break my egg, I am the Lord ! " *'* 

In view of this circular form, the " | " issuing from the '* 0»" ^^ ^^ 
egg, or the male from the female in the androgyne, it is strange to find 
a scholar saying — on the ground that the most ancient Indian MSS. 
show no trace of it — that the ancient Aryans were ignorant of the 
decimal notation. The 10, being the sacred number of the tmiverse, was 
secret and esoteric, both as the unit and cipher, or zero, the circle. 
Moreover. Professor Max Miiller says that " the two words cipher and 
scro, which arc but one. are sufficient to prove that our figures arc 
borrowed from the Arabs.*'* Cipher is the Arabic " cifron," and means 

469. Book I. ch. 2 470. Bock of tke Dfod, xrU, 50. 

471. IbiJ. xtii. 14. 472. Ibid, hoar. 47X See Max Mailer's Onr Figmns. 



WHENCE OUR FIGURES ? 361 

empty, a translation of the Sanskrit name of nought, "sunya," he says.*'* 
The Arabs had their figures from Hindustan, and never claimed the 
discovery for themselves.*'* As to the Pythagoreans, we need but turn 
to the ancient manuscripts of Boethius's Geometry, composed in the 
sixth century, to find among the Pythagorean numerals *'• the 1 and the 
nought, as the first and final ciphers. And Porphyry, who quotes from 
the Pythagorean Moderatus,^'''' says that the numerals of Pythagoras 
were " hieroglyphical symbols, by means whereof he explained ideas 
concerning the nature of things," or the origin of the universe. 

Now, if, on the other hand, the most ancient Indian manuscripts 
show as yet no trace of decimal notation in them, and Max Miiller states 
very clearly that until now he has found but nine letters (the initials of 
the Sanskrit numerals) in them; on the other hand, we have records as 
ancient to supply the wanted proof. We speak of the sculptures and 
the sacred imagery in the most ancient temples of the far East. Pytha- 
goras derived his knowledge from India; and we find Professor Max 
Miiller corroborating this statement, at least so far as to allow the Neo- 
Pythagoreans to have been the first teachers of "ciphering," among 
the Greeks and Romans ; that " they at Alexandria, or in Syria, became 
acquainted with the Indian figures, and adapted them to the Pytha- 
gorean abacus" (our figures). This cautious admission implies that 
Pythagoras himself was acquainted with but nine figures. Thus we 
might reasonably answer that although we possess no certain proof 
(exoterically) that the decimal notation was known by Pythagoras, 
who lived on the very close of the archaic ages,*'* we have yet sufiicient 
evidence to show that the full numbers, as given by Boethius, were 
known to the Pythagoreans, even before Alexandria was built.*'* This 
evidence we find in Aristotle, who says that " some philosophers hold 
that ideas and numbers are of the same nature, and amount to ten in 
all."**® This, we believe, will be sufficient to show that the decimal 
notation was known among them at least as early as four centuries 
B. c, for Aristotle does not seem to treat the question as an innovation 
of the " Neo- Pythagoreans." 

But we know more than that : we know that the decimal system must 

474. A Kabftlitt would be rather inclined 475. Sec Max Muller'a Our Figures, 

to belieirc that as the Arabic cifron was taken 475, Sce King's Gnostics and thsir Rt- 

from the Indian Htnya, nought, so the Jewish mains, plate xiit 

Kabalistic Sephiroth iSepkrim) were taken .-- y. p^*Lag 
from the word cipher, not in the sense of 

emptiness but the reverse — that of creation * *' ^ 

by number and degrees in their evolution. ^^9. This city was built 332 s. c 

And the Sephiroth are 10 or Q. 480. Melaph, yU, F. 



362 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

have been known to the mankind of the earliest archaic ages, since the 
whole astronomical and geometrical portion of the secret sacerdotal 
language was built upon the number 10, or the combination of the 
male and female principles, and since the P)rramid of " Cheops " is 
built upon the measures of this decimal notation, or rather upon the 
digits and their combinations with the nought. Of this, however, 
sufficient was said in Isis Unveiled, and it is useless to repeat and 
return to the same subject. 

The sjrmbolism of the Lunar and Solar Deities is so inextricably 
mixed up, that it is next to impossible to separate such glyphs as the 
egg, the lotus, and the " sacred " animals from each other. The ibis, 
for instance, sacred to Isis, who is often represented with the head of 
that bird, sacred also to Mercury or Thoth, because that god assumed 
its form while escaping from Typhon, — the ibis was held in the greatest 
veneration in Egypt There were two kinds of ibises, Herodotus tells 
us,*" in that country: one gufV^ fetocft, the other black and white. The 
former is credited with fighting and exterminating the winged serpents 
which came every spring from Arabia and infested the country. The 
other was sacred to the moon, because the latter planet is white and 
brilliant on her external side, dark and black on that side which she 
never turns to the earth. Moreover, the ibis kills land serpents, and 
makes the most terrible havoc amongst the eggs of the crocodile, and 
thus saves Egypt from having the Nile infested by those horrible 
Saurians. The bird is credited with doing so in the moonlight, and 
thus being helped by Isis, as the moon, her sidereal symbol. But 
the nearer esoteric truth underlying these popular myihs is, that 
Hermes, as shown by Abenephius,*"* watched under the form of that 
bird over the Egyptians, and taught them the occult arts and sciences. 
This means simply that the ibis religiosa had and has " magical " pro- 
perties in common with many other birds, the albatross pre-eminently, 
and the mythical white swan, the swan of Eternity or Time, the 
Kalahansa. 

Were it otherwise, indeed, why should all the ancient peoples, who 
were no more fools than we are, have had such a superstitious dread 
of killing certain birds ? In Egypt, he who killed an ibis, or the golden 
hawk — the symbol of the Sun and Osiris — risked and could hardly 
escape death. The veneration of some nations for birds was such that 
Zoroaster, in his precepts, forbids their slaughter as a heinous crime. 
We laugh in our age at every kind of divination. Yet why should so 
many generations have believed in divination by birds, and even in oo- 
mancy, said by Suidas to have been imparted by Orpheus, who taught 

481. Ul>. n, c. 7S #1 stq, 482. D$ Cnitn Aegypt, 



EGG-BORN LOGOI 363 

how to perceive in the yolk and white of the egg, under certain con- 
ditions, that which the bird bom from it would have seen around it 
during its short life. This occult art, which demanded 3000 years ago 
the greatest learning and the most abstruse mathematical calculations, 
has now fallen into the depths of degradation: it is old cooks and 
fortime-tellers who read their future to servant-girls in search of 
husbands, by means of the white of an egg in a glass. 

Nevertheless, even Christians have to this day their sacred birds; 
for instance, the dove, the sjrmbol of the Holy Ghost. Nor have they 
neglected the sacred animals. The Evangelical zoolatry — the Bull, 
the Eagle, the Lion, and the Angel (in reality the Cherub, or Seraph, 
the fiery-winged Serpent), is as much pagan aS that of the Egyptians 
or the Chaldaeans. These four animals are, in reality, the sjrmbols of 
the four elements, and of the four lower principles in man. Never- 
theless, they correspond physically and materially to the four con- 
stellations that form, so to speak, the suite or cortige of the Solar God, 
and occupy during the winter solstice the four cardinal points of the 
zodiacal circle. These four " animals " may be seen in many of the 
Roman Catholic New Testaments where the portraits of the evangelists 
are given. They are the animals of Ezekiel's Mercabah. 

As truly stated by Ragon, " the ancient Hierophants have combined 
so cleverly the dogmas and sjrmbols of their religious philosophies, that 
these symbols can be fully explained only by the combination and know- 
ledge of all the keys." They can be only approximately interpreted, 
even if one finds out three out of these seven systems : the anthropo- 
logical, the psychic, and the astronomical. The two chief interpreta- 
tions, the highest and the lowest, the spiritual and the physiological, 
they preserved in the greatest secrecy until the latter fell into the 
dominion of the profane. Thus far, with regard only to the pre-historic 
Hierophants, with whom that which has now become purely (or im- 
purely) phallic, was a science as profound and as mysterious as biology 
and physiology are now. This was their exclusive property, the fruit 
of their studies and discoveries. The other two were those which dealt 
with the creative gods (theogony), and with creative man, i.e., the 
ideal and the practical mysteries. These interpretations were so cleverly 
veiled and combined, that many were those who, while arriving at the 
discovery of one meaning, were baffled in understanding the significance 
of the others, and could never unriddle them sufficiently to commit 
dangerous indiscretions. The highest, the first and the fourth — theo- 
gony in relation to anthropogony — were almost impossible to fathom. 
We find the proofs of this in the Jewish " Holy Writ." 

It is owing to the serpent being oviparous, that it became a symbol of 
wisdom and an emblem of the Logoi, or the self -born. In the temple 



364 



THE SECRET DOCTRINE 



of Philae in Upper Egypt, an egg was artificially prepared of clay made 
of various incenses, and it was made to hatch by a peculiar process, 
when a cerastes (the homed viper) was bom. The same was done in 
antiquity for the cobra in the Indian temples. The creative God 
emerges from the egg that issues from the mouth of Kneph — as a 
winged serpent — because the Serpent is the symbol of the All-wisdom. 
With the Hebrews he is glyphed by the " flying or fiery serpents " of the 
Wilderness and Moses, and with the Alexandrian mystics he becomes 
the Ophio-Christos, the Logos of the Gnostics. The Protestants try 
to show that the allegory of the Brazen Serpent and of the " fiery ser- 
pents " has a direct reference to the mystery of Christ and Crucifix- 
ion ;*•* but it has a far nearer relation, in tmth, to the mystery of gen- 
eration, when dissociated from the egg with the central germ, or the 
circle with its central point. The brazen Serpent had no such holy 
meaning as that ; nor was it, in fact, glorified above the ** fiery serpents" 
for the bite of which it was only a natural remedy. The symbological 
meaning of the word " brazen " being the feminine principle, and that 
of fiery, or " gold," the male one.*** 

In the Book of the Dead, as just shown, reference is often made to 
the Egg. Ra, the mighty one, remains in his Egg, during the stmgjg^e 
between the "children of the rebellion" and Shu (the Solar Energy and 
the Dragon of Darkness) (ch. xvii). The deceased is resplendent in 



483. And this only becatue the brazen ser- 
pent was lifted on a pole! It bad rather a 
reference to Mico the Egyptian egg standing 
upright supported by the sacred Tau; since 
the Egg and the Serpent are inseparable in 
the old worship and symbology of Egypt, and 
since both the Brazen and *' fiery *' serpents 
were Sorapks, the " burning fiery " messen- 
gers, or the serpent Gods, the nAgat of India. 
It was a purely phallic symbol without the 
egg, while when associated with it — it relat* 
ed to cosmic creation. 

484. " Brass was a metal symbolizing the 
ntther world . . . that of the womb where 
life should be given. . . . The word for 
serpent was in Hebrew Nachask, but this is 
the same term for brtus," It is said in Num' 
hers (xxi) that the Jews complained of the 
Wilderness whtro tfure was no wattr (▼. 5.) ; 
after which " the Lord sent fiery serpents ** 
to bite them, when, to oblige Moses, he gives 
him as a remedy the brastn serpent on a 
pole to look at ; after which *' any man when 
he beheld the serpent of brass . . . lived " ( ? ) 
After that the ** Lord/* gathering the people 
together at the well of Beer, gives them water. 



(14-16), and grateful Israel sang this song, 
" Spring up, O Well," (▼. 17). When, after 
studying symbology, the Christian reader 
comes to understand the innermost meaning 
of these three symbols -' «Mil#r, brastn, tkg 
serpent, and a few more — in the sense given 
to them in the Holy Bible, he will hardly like 
to connect the sacred name of his Savior 
with the " Brazen Serpent *' incident. The 
Seraphim o^l}*)V (^I'T winged serpents) are 
no doubt connected with, and inseparable 
from, the idea "of the serpent of eternity 
— God,** as explained in Keneal/s Apoca- 
lypse, But the word cherub also meant 
pent, in one sense, though its direct 
ing is different; because the Chermbim and 
the Persian winged ypvwn ** griffins ** — tke 
guardians of the golden mountain — are the 
same, and their compound name shows their 
character, as it is formed of "^ (kr) circle, 
»"** am "aub," or ob — serpent — there- 
fore, a " serpent in a circle.** And this set- 
tles the phallic character of the Brazen Ser- 
pent, and justifies Hesekiah for breaking it 
(See II Kings, xriii 4.) yerbmm snHs mp- 
ientu 



THE WINGED GLOBE ^ 

his Egg when he crosses to the land of mystery (xxii, 1.). He is the 
Egg of Seb (liv. 1-3). .. . The Egg was the symbol of life in 
immortality and eternity; as also the glyph of the generative matrix; 
and the tau, associated with it, only of life and birth in generation. The 
Mundane Egg was placed in Khnum, the " Water of Space," or the 
feminine abstract principle (Khnum becoming, with the fall of mankind 
into generation and phallicism. Amen, the creative God) ; and when 
Ptah, the " fiery god," carries the Mundane egg in his hand, then the 
symbolism becomes quite terrestrial and concrete in its significance. 
In conjunction with the hawk, the symbol of Osiris-Sun, the symbol is 
dual: it relates to both lives — the mortal and the immortal. In 
Kircher's Oedipus Aegyptiacus*^^ one can see, on the papyrus engraved 
in it, an egg floating above the mummy. This is the symbol of hope and 
the promise of a second birth for the Osirified dead ; his Soul, after due 
purification in the Amenti, will gestate in this egg of immortality, to 
be reborn from it into a new life on earth. For this Egg, in the esoteric 
Doctrine, is the Devachan, the abode of Bliss; the winged scarabaeus 
being alike a symbol of it. The " winged globe " is but another form 
of the tgg, and has the same significance as the scarabaeus, the Khe^ 
Peru (from the root Kheper "to become," "to be reborn") which 
relates to the rebirth of man, as well as to his spiritual regeneration. 

In the Theogony of Mochos, we find Aether first, and then the air, 
from which Ulom, the intelligible {vwjfr6%) deity (the visible Universe 
of Matter) is born out of the Mundane Egg.*** 

In the Orphic Hymns, the Eros-Phanes evolves from the divine Egg, 
which the Aethereal IVinds impregnate, wind being " the Spirit of the 
unknown Darkness " — " the spirit of God " (as explains K. O. Miiller, 
236) ; the divine " Idea," says Plato, " who is said to move Aether." 

In the Hindu Kathakopanishad, Purusha, the divine spirit, already 
stands before the original matter, " from whose union springs the 
great soul of the world," Maha-Atma, Brahma, the Spirit of Life,**^ 
etc., etc.*** Besides this there are many charming allegories on this 
subject scattered through the sacred books of the Brahmans. In one 
place it is the female creator who is first a germ, then a drop of heavenly 
dew, a pearl, and then an egg. In such cases — of which there are too 
many to enumerate them separately — the Egg gives birth to the four 
elements within the fifth, Ether, and is covered with seven coverings, 
which become later on the seven upper and the seven lower worlds. 
Breaking in two, the shell becomes the heaven, and the meat in the egg 

4S5. Vol. iH» p. 124. Soul;" the astral light of the Kabalist and the 

486. Movera' D%€ PhdnisUr, p. 282. Occultiat. or the " Egg of Darkness." 

487. The later appellations are all identi- 488. Weber, " Akad. Vorles." pp. 213, 214 
cal with Anima Mmndi, or the " Universal #f seq. 



366 



THE SECRET DOCTRINE 



the earth, the white forming the terrestrial waters. Then again, it is 
Vishnu who emerges from within the egg with a lotus in his hand. 
Vinata, a daughter of Daksha and wife of Kasyapa ("the Self-bom 
sprung from Time," one of the seven "creators" of our world), brought 
forth an egg from which was born Garuda, the vehicle of Vishnu, the 
latter allegory having a relation to our Earth only, as Garuda is the 
Great Cycle. 

The egg was sacred to Isis ; the priests of Egypt never ate eggs on 
that account.*** 

Diodorus Siculus states that Osiris was bom from an Egg, like Brah- 
ma. From Leda's Egg Apollo and Latona were bom, as also Castor 
and Pollux — the bright Gemini. And though the Buddhists do not 
attribute the same origin to their Founder, yet, no more than the ancient 
Egyptians or the modem Brahmans, do they eat eggs, lest they should 
destroy the germ of life latent in them, and commit thereby Sin. The 
Chinese believe that their first man was bom from an egg, which Tien, 
a god, dropped down from heaven to earth into the waters.**^ This 
symbol is still regarded by some as representing the idea of the origin 
of life, which is a scientific truth, though the human ovum is invisible 
to the naked eye. Therefore we see respect shown to it from the re- 
motest past, by the Greeks, Phoenicians, Romans, the Japanese, and 
the Siamese, the North and South American tribes, and even the 
savages of the remotest islands. 

With the Egyptians, the concealed god was Amen (Men). All their 
gods were dual : the scientific reality for the Sanctuary ; its double, the 
fabulous and mythical Entity, for the masses. For instance, as ob- 
served in " Chaos, Theos, Kosmos," the older Horus was the Idea of 
the world remaining in the demiurgic mind " bom in Darkness before 
the creation of the world " ; the second Horns*** was the same Idea 
going forth from the Logos, becoming clothed with matter and assum- 
ing an actual existence.*** The same with Khnum and Amen;*** 
both are represented ram-headed, and both often confused, though 
their functions are different. Khnum is " the modeler of men," fash- 



489. Itis it mlmott always represented 
holding • lotus in one band and in the other 
a circle and the Cross (cnur ansata), the 
Egg being sacred to her, 

490. The Chinese seem to hare thus an> 
tidpated Sir William Thomson's theory that 
the first living germ had dropped to the 
Earth from some passing comet Query! 
why should this be called ecientifc and the 
Chinese idea a superstitious, foolish theory? 

491. Horus — the ''older.'* or Haroiri, is 
an ancient aspect of the solar god, contem- 



porary with Ra and Shm; Haroiri is often 
mistaken for Hor (Horsusi), Son of Osiris 
and Isis. The Egyptians very often repre- 
sented the rising Sun under the form of Hor 
the older, rising from a full-blown lotus, the 
Universe, when the solar disc is always 
found on the hawk-head of that god. Haroiri 
is Khnum. 

492. Compare Movers' Die Pkdminer, p. 
268. 

493. Amen or Men, the "hidden.** th« 
Supreme Spirit 



THE SCANDINAVIAN U)GOS 



367 



ioning men and things out of the Mundane Egg on a potter's wheel; 
Amen-Ra, the generator, is the secondary aspect of the concealed 
deity. Khnum was adored at Elephanta and Philae/** Amen at 
Thebes. But it is Emepht, the One, Supreme Planetary principle, who 
blows the egg out of his mouth, and who is, therefore, Brahma. The 
shadow of the deity, Kosmic and universal, of that which broods over 
and permeates the egg with its vivifying Spirit until the germ contained 
in it is ripe, was the mystery god whose name was unpronounceable. It 
is Ptah, however, " he who opens," the opener of life and Death,*** 
who proceeds from the egg of the world to begin his dual work.*** 

According to the Greeks, the phantom form of the Chemis (Chemi 
ancient Egypt) which floats on the ethereal waves of the Empyrean 
Sphere, was called into being by Horus-Apollo, the Stm god, who 
caused it to evolve out of the Mundane egg.**^ 

In the Scandinavian Cosmogony — placed by Professor Max Miiller, 
in point of time, as " far anterior to the Vedas " — in the poem of 
Voluspa (the song of the prophetess), the Mundane egg is again discov- 
ered in the phantom-germ of the Universe, which is represented as lying 
in the Ginnungagap — the cup of illusion (Mdyd) the boundless and 
void abyss. In this world's matrix, formerly a region of night and 
desolation, Niftheim (the mist-place, the nebular as it is called now, 
in the astral light) dropped a ray of cold light which overflowed this 
cup and froze in it. Then the Invisible blew a scorching wind which 
dissolved the frozen waters and cleared the mist. These waters (chaos), 
called the streams of Blivagar, distilling in vivifying drops, fell down 
and created the earth and the giant Ymir, who only had " the semblance 
of man " (the Heavenly man), and the cow, Audhumla (the " mother " 
or astral light. Cosmic Soul) from whose udder flowed four streams 
of milk (the four cardinal points: the four heads of the four rivers of 
Eden, etc., etc.) and which "four" allegorically are symbolized by 
the cube in all its various and mystical meanings. 

The Christians — especially the Greek and Latin Churches — have 
fully adopted the symbol, and see in it a commemoration of life eternal, 



494. His triadic goddettet are Sati and 

495. Ptah wai originally the god of 
death, of destruction, like Siva. He is a 
sclar god only by virtue of tbe sun's fire 
killing as well as vivifying. He was tbe 
national god of Memphis, the ndiant and 
•• fair-fac5ed God." (See Saqqarah Bronsis, 
Saitic Epoch.) 

496. Book of Numhert. 

497. Tbe BrahmAnda PurAna contains the 
myste r y about BrahmA's golden egg fully; 



and this is why, perhaps, it is inaccessible 
to the Orientalists, who say that this Purina, 
like the Skanda, is "no longer procurable in 
a collective body," but "is represented by 
a variety of Khandas and Mihfttmyas pro- 
fessing to be derived from it" The Bmh- 
mdnda Pur&na is described as "that which 
has declared in 12,200 verses, the magnifi- 
cence of the egg of Brahmi, and in which 
an account of the future Kalpas is ob- 
tained as revealed by BrahmiL" Quite so, 
and much more, perehanoe. 



368 



THE SECRET DOCTRINE 



of salvation and of resurrection. This is found in and corroborated by 
the time-honored custom of exchanging " Easter Eggs." From the 
anguinum, the "Egg" of the "pagan" Druid, whose name alone 
made Rome tremble with fear, to the red Easter Egg of the Slavonian 
peasant, a cycle has passed. And yet, whether in civilized Europe, or 
among the abject savages of Central America, we find the same 
archaic, primitive thought; if we only search for it and do not dis- 
figure — in the haughtiness of our fancied mental and physical super- 
iority — the original idea of the symbol. 



§ VII 



THE DAYS AND NIGHTS OF BRAHMA 

This is the name given to the Periods called Manvantara (Manu- 
antara, or between the Manus) and Pralaya (Dissolution) ; one refer- 
ring to the active periods of the Universe, the other to its times of 
relative and complete rest — according to whether they occur at the end 
of a " Day," or an " Age " (a life) of Brahma. These periods, which 
follow each other in regular succession, are also called Kcdpas, small 
and great, the minor and the Mahd Kalpa; though, properly speaking, 
the Maha Kalpa is never a " day," but a whole life or age of Brahma, 
for it is said in the Brahma Vaivarta: " Chronologers compute a 
Kalpa by the Life of Brahma; minor Kalpas, as Samvarta and the 
rest, are numerous." In sober truth they are infinite; as they have 
never had a commencement, ». e., there never was a first Kalpa, nor 
will there ever be a last one, in Eternity. 

One Parardha — in the ordinary acceptation of this measure of time 
— or half of the existence of Brahma (in the present Maha Kalpa) has 
already expired ; the last Kalpa was the Padma, or that of the Golden 
Lotos; the present one being Varaho^^^ (the "boar" incarnation, or 
Avat&r). 



498. There it • cnriout piece of informa* 
tion in the Buddhict esoteric traditions. The 
exoteric or aUetoriad hiography of Gautama 
Buddha ahowa thia great Sage djing of an 
indigestion of pork and ricf, a very prosaic 
end, indeed, having little of the solemn ele- 
ment in it This is explained as an allegori- 
cal reference to hia having heen horn in the 
*' Boar/* or Variha-Kalpa when Brahmi as- 
sumed the form of that animal to raise the 



Earth out of the " Waters of Space.** And 
as the Br&hmana descend direct from Brahm4 
and are, so to speak, identified with him; 
and as they are at the same time the mortal 
enemies of Buddha and Buddhism, we have 
the curious allegorical hint and comUnatioa. 
Brahmanism (of the Boar, or FarAka Kslpm) 
has slaughtered the religion of Buddha in 
India, swept it away from its face; therefore 
Buddha, identified with his philosophy, ia 



HUMAN GODS AND DIVINE MEN 



369 



By the scholar who studies the Hindu religion from the Puranas, 
one thing is to be especially noted. He must not take literally, and 
in one sense only, the statements therein found; since those which 
especially concern the Manvantaras or Kalpas have to be understood 
in their several references. So, for instance, these periods relate in 
the same language to both the great and the small periods, to Maha 
Kalpas and to minor Cycles. The Matsya, or Fish Avatar, happened 
before the Varaha or Boar Avatar ; the allegories, therefore, must re- 
late to both the Padma and the present manvantara, and also to the 
minor cycles which took place since the reappearance of our Chain of 
Worlds and Earth. And, as the Matsya Avatar of Vishnu and Vaiva- 
svata's Deluge are correctly connected with an event that happened on 
our Earth during this Round, it is evident that while it may relate to 
pre-cosmic events (in the sense of our Kosmos or Solar system) it has 
reference in our case to a distant geological period. Not even Esoteric 
philosophy can claim to know, except by analogical inference, that 
which took place before the reappearance of our Solar System and 
previous to tfie last M(ih& Pralaya. But it teaches distinctly that after 
the first geological disturbance in the Earth's axis which ended in the 
sweeping down to the bottom of the Seas of the whole second Contin- 
ent, with its primeval races — of which successive " Earths " or Con- 
tinents Atlantis was the fourth — there came another disturbance by 
the axis resuming as rapidly its previous degree of inclination; whoi 
the Earth was indeed raised once more out of the Waters, and — as 
above so it is below ; and vice versa. There were "gods" on Earth in 
those days — gods, and not men, as we know them now, says the tradi- 
tion. As will be shown in Book H, the computation of periods in exo- 
teric Hindiiism refers to both the great cosmic and the small terrestrial 
events and cataclysms, and the same may be shown for names. For 
instance Yudhishthira — the first King of the Sacea, who opens the Kali 
Yuga era, which has to last 432,000 years — "an actual King and man 
who lived 3102 years b. c./' applies also, name and all, to the great 
Deluge at the time of the first sinking of Atlantis. He is the " Yudhish- 
thira *•• bom on the mountain of the hundred peaks at the extremity of 



Mid to lutve died from the effects of eat- 
iflf of the Beth of a wild hog. The idea 
alone of one who establiahed the most rigor- 
oos Tegetarianism and re^>ect for anknal life 
— eren to refusing to eat eggs as vfMcUs of 
a lat^ni future life — dying of a meat indi- 
gestion, is absurdly contradictory and has 
puzzled more than one Orientalist But this 
explanation, unveUing the allegory, explains 
all the rest The Vardha, however, is no 
simple boar, and seems to have meant at first 



some antediluvian lacustrine animal " delight- 
ing to sport in water." iVdyu Pmrdnd) 

499. According to Colonel Wilford, the 
conclusion of the '* Great War " was a. c. 
1370 (See A. R, VoL 9, p. 116); according 
to Bentley, 575 B.C. 1 1 We may hope, per- 
haps, that before the end of this century, 
the Mahabhftratan epics will be found and 
proclaimed identical with the wars of the 
great Napoleon. 



370 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

the world beyond which nobody can go " and " immediately after the 
flood." *^^ We know of no " Flood " 3102 years b. c. — not even that 
of Noah, for, agreeably with Judaeo-Christian chronology, it took place 
2349 years b. c. 

This relates to an esoteric division of time and a mystery explained 
elsewhere, and may therefore be left aside for the present Suffice 
to remark at this juncture that all the efforts of imagination of the 
Wilfords, Bentleys, and other would-be Oedipuses of esoteric Hindii 
Chronology have sadly failed. No computation of either the Four 
Ages, or the Manvantaras, has ever been unriddled by our very learned 
Orientalists, who have therefore cut the Gordian Knot by proclaiming 
the whole " a figment of the Brahmanical brain." So be it, and may 
the great scholars rest in peace. This "figment" is given in the 
Preliminary Sections which preface Anthropogenesis in Book II, and 
with esoteric additions. 

Let us see, however, what were the three kinds of pralayas, and what 
is the popular belief about them. For once it agrees with Esoteridsm. 

Of the pralaya before which fourteen Manvantaras elapse, having 
over them as many presiding Manus, and at whose close occurs the 
" incidental " or Brahma's dissolution, it is said in Vishnu Purdna, in 
condensed form, that 

at the end of a thousand periods of four ages, which complete a day of Brahma, 
the earth is almost exhausted. The eternal Avyaya (Vishnu) assumes then the 
character of Rudra (the destroyer, Siva) and re-unites all his creatures to 
himself. He enters the Seven rays of the Sun and drinks up all the waters 
of the globe; he causes the moisture to evaporate, thus drying up the whole 
Earth. Oceans and rivers, torrents and small streams, are all exhaled. Thus 
fed with abundant moisture the seven solar rays become seven suns by dilation, 
and they finally set the world on fire. Hari, the destroyer of all things, who 
is "the flame of time, Kdldgni" finally consumes the Earth. Then Rudra, be- 
coming Janardana, breathes clouds and rain. 

There are many kinds of Pralaya, but three chief ones are specially 
mentioned in old Hindu books; and of these, as Wilson shows: — 
The first is called Naimittika *** " occasional " or " incidental," caused 
by the intervals of " Brahma's Days " ; it is the destruction of crea- 
tures, of all that lives and has a form, but not of the substance which 
remains in statu quo till the new dawn in that " Night." The other 

500. Sec Royal Asiai, Sac, VoL 9, p. 364. Brahmi or rather BrahmA beinff himself a 

501. In the VedAnta and Ny^ya "nimltta" caoae, U aoperjor to Pradhina. Hence ** in- 
(from which " Naimittika ") it rendered ai ddenUl " it wrongly translated, and o««ht 
the €§Ui4nt cause, when antithesised with to be translated, as shown by some scholars* 
np^dAno the physical or material cause. In ** Ideal " cause, and eren reai cause would 
the SAnkhya pradh&na is a cause inferior to have been better. 



THE RE-BIRTH OF GODS 371 

is called Prakritika — and occurs at the end of the Age or Life of 
Brahma, when everything that exists is resolved into the primal ele- 
ment, to be remodeled at the end of that longer night. But the third, 
Atyantika, does not concern the Worlds or the Universe, but only the 
individualities of some people; it is thus individual pralaya or nir- 
vana; after having reached which, there is no more future existence 
possible, no rebirth till after the Maha Pralaya. The latter night, last- 
ing as it does, 311,040,000,000,000 years, and having the possibility of 
being almost doubled in case the lucky Jivanmukta reaches Nirvana at 
an early period of a Manvantara, is long enough to be regarded as 
eternal, if not endless. The Bhdgavata^^^^ speaks of a fourth kind of 
prala}ra, the NUya or constant dissolution, and explains it as the change 
which takes place imperceptibly in everything in this Universe from 
the globe down to the atom — without cessation. It is growth and 
decay (life and death). 

When the Maha Pralaya arrives, the inhabitants of Svar-loka (the 
upper sphere) disturbed by the conflagration, seek refuge " with the 
Pitris, their progenitors, tihe Manus, the Seven Rishis, the various 
orders of celestial Spirits and the Gods, in Maharloka." When the 
latter is reached also, the whole of the above enumerated beings mi- 
grate in their turn from Maharloka, and repair to Jana-loka in " their 
subtile forms, destined to become re-embodied, in similar capacities as 
their former, when the world is renewed at the beginning of the suc- 
ceeding Kalpa" *** Vishnu Purana goes on : 

. . . These clouds, mighty in size, and loud in thunder, fill up all space (Nabhas- 
tala). Showering down torrents of water, these clouds quench the dreadful 
fires, and then they rain uninterruptedly for a hundred (divine) years, and 
deluge the whole world (Solar System). Pouring down, in drops as large as 
dice, these rains overspread the earth, and fill the middle region (Bhuvarloka) 
and inundate heaven. The world is now enveloped in darkness, and all things 
animate, or inanimate, having perished, the clouds continue to pour down their 
waters . . . and the Night of Brahma reigns supreme over the scene of desol- 
ation. . . . 

This is what we call in the Esoteric Doctrine a " Solar Pralaya." . . . 
When the waters have reached the region of the Seven Rishis, and the 
world (our Solar System) is one ocean, they stop. The breath of 
Vishnu becomes a strong wind, which blows for another hundred 
(divine) years until all clouds are dispersed. The wind is then re- 
absorbed: and 

That, of which all things are made, the Lord by whom all things exist, He 

501a. XII, iv, 35. 502. VAyu PurAna, 503. Book VI, ch. iii 



372 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

who is inconceivable, without beginning, the beginning of the universe, reposes, 
sleeping upon ^sha [the Serpent of Infinity] in the midst of the deep. The 
Adikrit [Creator?] Hart, sleeps upon the ocean of Space in the form of Brahma 
— glorified by Sanaka"** and the Siddhas (Saints) of Jana-Loka, and contemplated 
by the holy denizens of Brahma-loka, anxious for final liberation, involved in 
mystic slumber, the celestial personification of his own illusions. . . . 

This is the Pratisanchara (dissolution?) termed incidental because 

Hart is its incidental (ideal) Cause *^ When the Universal Spirit 

wakes, the world revives ; when he closes his eyes, all things fall upon 
the bed of mystic slumber. In like manner, as 1(XX) great ages consti- 
tute a Day of Brahma (in the original it is Padma-yoni, the same as 
Abjayoni — "lotos-bom," not Brahma), so his Night consists of the 
same period. "Awaking at the end of his night, the unborn . . . creates 
the Universe anew. . . Z'**^ 

This is "incidental" pralaya; what is the Elemental Dbsohition? 
Says Parasara to Maitreya: 

When by dearth and fire all the worlds and Patalas [hells] are w ith ered 
up . . .*** the progress of elemental dissolution is begun. Then, first the waters 
swallow up the property of Earth (which is the rudiment of smell), and earth 
deprived of this property proceeds to destruction — and becomes one with water 
. . . when the Universe is thus pervaded by the waves of the watery Element, 
its rudimentary flavor is licked up by the elements of fire ... on account of 
which the waters themselves are destroyed . . . and become one with fire; and 
the Universe is therefore entirely filled with flame [ethereal] which gradually 
overspreads the whole world. While Space is one flame, the element of wind 
seizes upon the rudimental property or form, which is the cause of light, and that 
being withdrawn (praRna) all becomes of the nature of air. The rudiment of 
form being destroyed, and Vibhdvasu [fire ?] deprived of its rudiment, air ex- 
tinguishes fire and spreads over space, which b deprived of light when fire 
merges into air. Air, then, accompanied by sound, which is the source of Ether, 
extends everywhere throughout the ten regions . . . until Ether seizes upon 
cohesion [Sparia — Touch ?] its rudimental property, by the loss of which, air 
is destroyed, and kha remains unmodified; devoid of form, flavor, touch 
(SparJa), and smell, it exists, embodied (mUrttimat) and vast, and pervades the 
whole Space. Akaia, whose characteristic property and rudiment is sound [the 
"Word"], occupies the whole containment of Space. Then the origin [Nou- 
menon?] of the Elements (Bhutddi), devours sound [collective Demionrgos]i 

504. The chief KuimSra or Vlrfia-ffod (a Theot, Kotmot," P»rt II, | nr. 
Dhyin Chohan) who reftiaet to create. A 506. Vishnu PurAna, 

prototTpe of St Michael* who refnaea to do S07. Thia proapcct would hardly aolt 

the aaae. Chriatian theology* which prefera an eternal, 

505. See condwUnc Unea in I *' Chaoa, everlaatinc hell for ita followera. 



THE DISSOLUTION OF THE EGG 



373 



[and the hosts of Dhyan Chohans] and all the existing Elements'^ are at once 
merged into their original The primary Element, Consciousness, combined with 
tdmasa [spiritual darkness] is itself disintegrated by mahaT [the Universal 
Intellect], whose characteristic property is Buddhi, and earth and Mahat are the 
inner and outer boundaries of the Universe. [Thus as in the beginning] were 
the seven forms of Prakriti [nature] reckoned from Mahat to earth, so these 
seven successively re-enter into each other."^ 

The Egg of Brahma (Sarva-mandala) is dissolved in the waters that sur- 
round it, with its seven zones (dvipas), seven oceans, seven regions, and their 
mountains; the investure of water is drunk by the fire; the (stratum of) fire 
is absorbed by (that of) air; air blends itself with ether [Akaia] ; the BhUtddi 
[the origin, or rather the cause, of the primary element] devours the ether and 
is (itself) destroyed by Mahat [the Great, the Universal mind], which along 
with all these is seized upon by Prakriti and disappears. The Prakriti is essen- 
tially the same, whether discrete or indiscrete; only that which is discrete is 
finally absorbed by and lost in the indiscrete. Pums [Spirit] also, which is one, 
pure, imperishable, eternal, all-pervading, is a portion of that Supreme spirit 
which is all things. That Spirit [Sarvela] which is other than (embodied) 
Spirit, and in which there are no attributes of name, species [ndman and jdti, 
or r^pa, hence body rather than species], or the like — remains as the sole ex- 
istence (Satta). . . . Prakriti and Purusha both resolving finally into Supreme 
Spirit. . . • 

This is the final Prai^ya •" — the Death of Kosmos — after which 
its Spirit rests in Nirvana, or in that for which there is neither Day 
nor Night. All the other pralayas are periodical and follow, in regular 
succession, the Manvantaras, as the night follows the day of every 
human creature, animal, and plant. The cycle of creation of the lives 
of Kosmos is run down, the energy of the manifested " Word " having 
its growth, culmination, and decrease, as have all things temporary, 



508. The tenn "Elements" most be un- 
dentood here to mean not only the visible 
•ad physical Elements, but also that which 
St Paid calls Elements — the spiritual, in- 
ftdUfent Potencies — Anfels and Demons in 
their Ifanrantaric form. 

509. When this description is correctly 
understood by Orientalists in its esoteric siff* 
nificanoe then it will be found that this Cos- 
mic correlation of World-Elements may ex- 
plain the correlation of physical forces better 
than those now known. At any rate, theo- 
sophists will peroeiYe that Prakriti has seven 
forms, or principles, " reckoned from Mahat 
to EartiL" The "Waters" mean here the 



Mystic "mother"; the Womb of abstract 
nature, in which the manifested Universe is 
conceived. The Seven "zone^* have rcler^ 
enoe to the Seven Divisions of that Universe, 
or the Noumena of the Forces that bring it 
into being. It is all allegorical 

510. From Vishnu Purina, Wilson's mis- 
takes being here corrected, and original words 
put in brackets. 

511. As it is the MaM, the Great, or so- 
called final PKAI.ATA which is here described, 
every thing is re-absorbed into its original 
0N« Element — the "Gods themselves, Brah- 
mi and the rest" being said to die and 
dis^>pear during that long migbt. 



374 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

however long their duration. The Creative Force is Eternal as Nou- 
menon; as a phenomenal manifestation in its aspects, it has a begins 
ning and must, therefore, have an end. During that interval it has its 
periods of activity and its periods of rest And these are the " Days 
and the nights of Brahma." But Brahma, the Noumenon, never rests, 
as IT never changes and ever is, though it cannot be said to be 
anywhere. . . . 

The Jewish Kabalists felt this necessity of immutability in an eter- 
nal, infinite Deity, and therefore applied the same thought to the an- 
thropomorphic god. The idea is poetical and very appropriate in its 
application. In the Zohar we read as follows : — 

As Moses was keeping a vigil on Mount Sinai, in company with the deity, who 
was concealed from his sight by a cloud, he felt a great fear overcome him, and 
suddenly asked : " Lord, where art thou . . . sleepest thou, O Lord ? . . ." And 
the Spirit answered him : " I never sleep : were I to fall asleep for a moment 
BEFQKS MY TiicE, all the creation would crumble into dissolution in one instant" 

" Before my time " is very suggestive. It shows the God of Moses 
to be only a temporary substitute, like Brahma the male, a substitute 
and an aspect of that which is immutable, and which therefore can 
take no part in the *' days," or in the " nights," nor have any concern 
whatever with reaction or dissolution. 

While the Eastern Occultists have seven modes of interpretation, 
the Jews have only four — namely, the real-mystical ; the allegorical ; 
the moral; and the literal or Pashut, The latter is the key of the 
exoteric Churches and not worth discussion. Read in the first, or 
mystical key, here are several sentences which show the identity of 
the foundations of construction in every Scripture. It is given in 
Mr. I. Myer's excellent book on the Kabalistic works he seems to 
have well studied. I quote verbatim: 

B'raisheeth barah elohim ath hashshama'yem tfath haa'rets — i.e., "In the 
beginning the God(s) created the heavens and the earth;" (the meaning of 
which is:) the six Sephiroth of Construction,"* over which B'raisheeth stands, 
all belong Below, It created six (and) on these stand all Things. And those 
depend upon the seven forms of the Cranium up to the Dignity of all Dignities. 
And the second "Earth" does not come into calculation, therefore it has been 
said: "And from it (that Earth) which underwent the curse, came it forth" 
... "It (the Earth) was without form and void; and darkness was over the 
face of the Abyss, and the Spirit of elohim . . . was breathing (m/ racka 
*pheth) — t. e., hovering, brooding over, moving. . . . Thirteen depend on thir- 

512. The *«Btinden** ol the Staniai. 



ARCHAIC SYMBOLISM 375 

teen (forms) of the most worthy Dignity. Six thousand years hang (are re- 
ferred to) in the first six words. The seventh (thousand, the millennium) 
above it (the cursed Earth) is that which is strong by Itself. And it was 
rendered entirely desolate during twelve hours (one . . . Day) as is written. 
. . . In the thirteenth, It (the Deity) shall restore all . . . and everything shall 
be renewed as before; and all those six shall continue . . . etc""* 

The " Sephiroth of Construction " are the six Dhyan Chohans, or 
Manus, or Prajapatis, synthesized by the seventh "B'raisheeth (the 
First Emanation or Logos), and who are called, therefore, the Builders 
of the Lower or physical Universe," all belonging Below. These six 

\0\ whose essence is of the Seventh — are the Up&dhi, the base 

or fundamental stone on which the objective Universe is built, the nou- 
menoi of all things. Hence they are, at the same time, the Forces of 
nature, the Seven Angels of the Presence, the sixth and seventh prin- 
ciples in man; the spirito-psycho-physical spheres of the Septenary 
chain, the Root Races, etc., etc. They all "depend upon the Seven forms 
of the Cranium " up to the highest. The " second Earth " " does not 
come into calculation " because it is no Earth, but the Chaos or Abyss 
of Space in which rested the paradigmatic, or model universe in ide- 
ation of the oviER-souL brooding over it. The term " Curse " is here 
very misleading, for it means simply doom or destiny, or that fatality 
which sent it forth into the objective state. This is shown by that 
" Earth " under the ** Curse " being described as " without form and 
void," in whose abysmal depths the " Breath " of the Elohim (col- 
lective Logoi) produced or photographed the first divine Ideation of 
the things to be. This process is repeated after every Pralaya before 
the beginnings of a new Manvantara, or period of sentient individual 
being. "Thirteen depend on thirteen forms," refers to the thirteen 
periods personified by the thirteen Manus, with Svayambhuva the four- 
teenth ( 13, instead of 14, being an additional veil) : those fourteen 
Manus who reign within the term of a Maha)ruga, a " Day " of Brahma. 
These (thirteen-fourteen) of the objective Universe depend on the thir- 
teen (fourteen) paradigmatic, ideal forms. The meaning of the " Six 
thousand years " which " hang in the first six words," has again to be 
sought in the Indian Wisdom. They refer to the primordial six (seven) 
" Kings of Edom " who typify the worlds (or spheres) of our chain 
during the first Round, as well as the primordial men of this Round. 
They are the septenary pre-Adamic (or before the Third, Separated 
Race) first Root-race. As they were shadows, and senseless (they had 
not eaten yet of the fruit of the Tree of Knowledge), they could not see 

S13. Qabbaiak, p. 233, from Siphrah DMtniula, c i, | 16, #1 uq. 



376 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

the Parzuphim, or " Face could not see Face " (primeval men were 
unconscious), "therefore, the primordial (seven) Kings died," i.e,, 
were destroyed {vide Siphrdh Dzeniuta). Now, who are they? They 
are the Kings who are " the Seven Rishis, certain (secondary) divini- 
ties, Sakra (Indra), Manu, and the Kings his Sons, who are created 
and perish at one period" as said in Vishnu Purana*^* For the sev- 
enth ("thousand") (not the millennium of exoteric Christianity, but 
that of Anthropogenesis) represents both the " seventh period of cre- 
ation," that of physical man (Vishnu Purana), and the seventh Prin- 
ciple — both macrocosmic and microcosmic, — as also the pralaya after 
the Seventh period, the " Night " which has the same duration as the 
" Day " of Brahma. " It was rendered entirely desolate during twelve 
hours, as is written." It is in the Thirteenth (twice six and the Syn- 
thesis) that everything shall be restored " and the six will continue." 

Thus the author of the Qabbalah remarks quite truly that 

Long before his [Ibn Gebirol's] time . . . many centuries before the Christian 
era, there was in Central Asia a '* Wisdom Religion " ; fragments of which sub- 
sequently existed among the learned men of the archaic Egyptians, the ancient 
Chinese, Hindus, etc . . . [and that] . . . The Qabbalah most likely originally 
came from Aryan sources, through Central Asia, Persia, India and Mesopotamia, 
for from Ur and Haran came Abraham and many others into Palestine."^ 

And such was the firm conviction of C. W. King, the author of The 
Gnostics and their Remains. 

Vamadeva Modelyar (Modely) describes the coming " night " most 
poetically. Though it is given in Isis Unveiled, it is worthy of repetition. 

Strange noises are heard proceeding from every point . . . These are the 
precursors of the Night of Brahma; dusk rises at the horizon, and the Sun 
passes away behind the thirteenth degree of Makara (sign of the Zodiac), and 
will reach no more the sign of the Mxna (zodiacal pisces, or fish). The gums 
of the pagodas appointed to watch the rdh-chakra (Zodiac), may now break their 
circle and instruments, for they are henceforth useless. 

Gradually light pales, heat diminishes, uninhabited spots multiply on the earth, 
the air becomes more and more rarefied ; the springs of waters dry up, the great 
rivers see their waves exhausted, the ocean shows its sandy bottom and plants 
die. Men and animals decrease in size daily. Life and motion lose their force, 
planets can hardly gravitate in space; they are extinguished one by one, like a 
lamp which the hand of the chokra (servant) neglects to replenish. Surya (the 
Sun) flickers and goes out, matter falls into dissolution (pralaya), and Brahma 
merges back into Dyaus,the Unrevealed (jod,and,his task being accomplished, 

514. Book I, chap. iil. SHa. Page 321. 



THE PURANIC PROPHECY 377 

he falls asleep. Another day is passed, night sets in, and continues until the 
future dawn. 

And now again he re-enters into the golden egg of His Thought, the germs of 
all that exist, as the divine Manu tells us. During His peaceful rest, the animated 
beings, endowed with the principles of action, cease their functions, and all 
feeling (manas) becomes dormant. When they are all absorbed in the Supreme 
Soul, this Soul of all the beings sleeps in complete repose till the day when 
it resumes its form, and awakes again from its primitive darkness.*^ 

As the '' Satya-yuga " is always the first in the series of the four ages 
or Yugas, so the Kali ever comes the last. The KM yuga reigns now 
supreme in India, and it seems to coincide with that of the Western age. 
Anyhow, it is curious to see how prophetic in almost all things was the 
writer of Vishnu Pur&na when foretelling to Maitreya some of the 
dark influences and sins of this Kali Yug. For after saying that the 
" barbarians " will be masters of the banks of the Indus, of Chandra- 
bhaga and Kasmira, he adds : 

There will be contemporary monarchs, reigning over the earth — kings of 
churlish spirit, violent temper, and ever addicted to falsehood and wickedness. 
They will inflict death on women, children, and cows; they will seize upon the 
property of their subjects, and be intent upon the wives of others; they will be 
of unlimited power, their lives will be short, their desires insatiable. . . . People 
of various countries intermingling with them, will follow their example ; and the 
barbarians being powerful [in India] in the patronage of the princes, while purer 
tribes are neglected, the people will perish [or, as the Commentator has it, 
** The Mlechchhas will be in the center and the Aryas in the end."] •*• Wealth 
and piety will decrease until the world will be wholly depraved. Property alone 
will confer rank; wealth will be the only source of devotion; passion will be 
the sole bond of union between the sexes; falsehood will be the only means of 
success in litigation; and women will be objects merely of sensual gratification. 
. . . External types will be the only distinction of the several orders of life; . . . 
a man if rich will be reputed pure; dishonesty {anyaya) will be the universal 
means of subsistence, weakness the cause of dependence, menace and presumption 
will be substituted for learning; liberality will be devotion; mutual assent, 
marriage; fine clothes dignity. He who is the strongest will reign; the people, 
unable to bear the heavy burthen, Khara bhara (the load of taxes) will take 
refuge among the valleys. . . . Thus, in the Kali age will decay constantly proceed, 
until the human race approaches its annihilation (pralaya). . . . When the close 
of the Kali age shall be nigh, a portion of that divine being which exists, of its 
own spiritual nature . . . shall descend on Earth . . . ( Kalki-Avatdra) endowed 
with the eight superhuman faculties. ... He will re-establish righteousness on 



515. See JacoUiot's "Us PiU (f# Ditu"; VIndt de* Brahmts, p. 230. 

516. If this is not prophetic, whst is? 



368 



THE SECRET DOCTRINE 



of salvation and of resurrection. This is found in and corroborated by 
the time-honored custom of exchanging " Easter Eggs." From the 
anguinum, the " Egg " of the " pagan " Druid, whose name alone 
made Rome tremble with fear, to the red Easter Egg of the Slavonian 
peasant, a cycle has passed. And yet, whether in civilized Europe, or 
among the abject savages of Central America, we find the same 
archaic, primitive thought; if we only search for it and do not dis- 
figure — in the haughtiness of our fancied mental and physical super- 
iority — the original idea of the symbol. 



§ VII 



THE DAYS AND NIGHTS OF BRAHMA 

This is the name given to the Periods called Manvantara {Manu- 
antara, or between the Manus) and Pralaya (Dissolution) ; one refer- 
ring to the active periods of the Universe, the other to its times of 
relative and complete rest — according to whether they occur at the end 
of a " Day," or an " Age " (a life) of Brahma. These periods, which 
follow each other in regular succession, are also called Kcdpas, small 
and great, the minor and the Maha Kalpa; though, properly speaking, 
the Maha Kalpa is never a *' day," but a whole life or age of Brahma, 
for it is said in the Brahma Voivarta: " Chronologers compute a 
Kalpa by the Life of Brahma; minor Kalpas, as Samvarta and the 
rest, are numerous." In sober truth they are infinite; as they have 
never had a commencement, ». e., there never was a first Kalpa, nor 
will there ever be a IcLSt one, in Eternity. 

One Parardha — in the ordinary acceptation of this measure of time 
— or half of the existence of Brahma (in the present Mohi Kalpa) has 
already expired ; the last Kalpa was the Padma, or that of the Golden 
Lotos; the present one being Varaho*^* (the "boar" incarnation, or 
Avai&r), 



498. There it • cnrioas piece of informa- 
tkm in the Bnddhict esoteric traditions. The 
exoteric or alhgoricai biography of Gautama 
Baddha thowa this freat Sage dying of an 
indigestion of pork and rice, a very prosak 
end. indeed, having little of the solemn ele- 
ment in it This is explained as an allegori- 
cal reference to his having been bom &n the 
" Boar," or Variha-Kalpa when BrahmA as- 
sumed the form of that animal to raise the 



Earth out of the " Waters of Space.** And 
as the Br&hmans descend direct from Brahm4 
and are. so to speak, identified with him; 
and as they are at the same time the mortal 
enemies of Buddha and Buddhism, we have 
the curious allegorical hint and combination. 
Brahmanism (of the Boar, or FarAka Kmipm) 
has slaughtered the religion of Buddha in 
India, swept it away from its face; therefore 
Buddha, identified with his philosophy, ia 



HUMAN GODS AND DIVINE MEN 



369 



By the scholar who studies the Hindu religion from the Puranas, 
one thing is to be especially noted. He must not take literally, and 
in one sense only, the statements therein found; since those which 
especially concern the Manvantaras or Kalpas have to be understood 
in their several references. So, for instance, these periods relate in 
the same language to both the great and the small periods, to Maha 
Kalpas and to minor Cycles. The Matsya, or Fish Avatar, happened 
before the Varaha or Boar Avatar; the allegories, therefore, must re- 
late to both the Padma and the present manvantara, and also to the 
minor cycles which took place since the reappearance of our Chain of 
Worlds and Earth. And, as the Matsya Avatar of Vishnu and Vaiva- 
svata's Deluge are correctly connected with an event that happened on 
our Earth during this Round, it is evident that while it may relate to 
pre-cosmic events (in the sense of our Kosmos or Solar system) it has 
reference in our case to a distant geological period. Not even Esoteric 
philosophy can claim to know, except by analogical inference, that 
which took place before the reappearance of our Solar System and 
previous to the last Mah& Pralaya. But it teaches distinctly that after 
the first geological disturbance in the Earth's axis which ended in the 
sweeping down to the bottom of the Seas of the whole second Contin- 
ent, with its primeval races — of which successive " Earths " or Con- 
tinents Atlantis was the fourth — there came another disturbance by 
the axis resuming as rapidly its previous degree of inclination; when 
the Earth was indeed raised once more out of the Waters, and — as 
above so it is below ; and vice versa. There were "gods" on Earth in 
those days — gods, and not men, as we know them now, says the tradi- 
tion. As will be shown in Book H, the computation of periods in exo- 
teric Hinduism refers to both the great cosmic and the small terrestrial 
events and cataclysms, and the same may be shown for names. For 
instance Yudhishthira — the first King of the Sacea, who opens the Kali 
Yuga era, which has to last 432,000 years — " an actual King and man 
who lived 3102 years b. c./' applies also, name and all, to the great 
Deluge at the time of the first sinking of Atlantis. He is the " Yudhish- 
thira *•• born on the mountain of the hundred peaks at the extremity of 



Mid to h«Ye died from the effects of eat- 
ing of the flesh of a wild hog. The idea 
alone of one who established the most rigor- 
ous Tegetarianiam and respect for animal life 
— even to refusing to eat eggs as vfhicUs of 
a latent fnture life — dying of a meat indi- 
gestion* is absurdly contradictory and has 
pnzsled more than one Orientalist But this 
explanation, unveiling the allegory, explains 
all the rest The Vardka, however, is no 
simple boar, and seems to have meant at first 



some antediluvian lacustrine animal '* delight- 
ing to sport in water." iVdyu Pmrdna) 

499. According to Colonel Wilford, the 
conclusion of the " Great War " was a. c 
1370 (See A. R, Vol. 9, p. 116); according 
to Bentley, 575 a. ct ! We may hope, per- 
haps, that before the end of this century, 
the Blah&bh&ratan epics will be found and 
proclaimed identical with the wars of the 
great Napoleon. 



378 



THE SECRET DOCTRINE 



earth, and the minds of those who live at the end of Kali Yuga shall be 
awakened and become as pellucid as crystal. The men who are thus changed 
. . . shall be the seeds of human beings, and shall give birth to a race who shall 
follow the laws of the Krita age, the age of purity. As it is said, "When the 
sun and moon and the lunar asterism Tishya and the planet Jupiter are in one 
mansion the Krita (or Satya) age shall return." 

. . . Two persons, Devapi, of the race of Kuru and Mom, of the family of 
Ikshvaku, continue alive throughout the four ages, residing at Kalapa.*" They 
will return hither in the beginning of the Krita age . . . Mom"* the son of 
Sighru through the power of Yoga is still living . . . and will be the restorer 
of the Kshatriya race of the Solar dynasty." (V&yu Purdna, Vol. Ill, p. 197.) 

Whether right or wrong with regard to the latter prophecy, the 
blessings of Kali Yuga are well described, and fit in admirably even 
with that which one sees and hears in Europe and other civilized and 
Christian lands in full XlXth, and at the dawn of the XXth century 
of our great era of Enlightenment. 



517. Maisya PnrAna ghret Katipt. 

518. Max Mdller tranilates the name aa 
Moiya, of the Morya dynaaty, to which Chan- 
dragttpta belonged (we Sauskrii LUerahtrf), 
In Maisya Pur^tut, chapter ccbadi, the dynaa- 
ty of ten Moryaa (or Manreyaa) ia spoken 
of. In the tame chapter* ccbodl, k ia stated 
that the Moryaa will one day reign over 
India, after reatoring the Kthatriya race 
many thousand years hence. Only tiiat reign 
will be purely Spkitual and "not of thia 
world." It will be the kingdom of the next 
ATatlr. Colonel Tod beUeres the name 
Morya (or Maurtyat) a corruption of Mori, 
a Rftjput tribe, and the commentary on 
MaMvanta thinks that some prinoea hare 



taken their name Maurya from their town 
called Mori, or, aa Professor Max Mdller 
gires it, Morya-Nftgara, which is more cor* 
rect, after the original MakAvamta, Viekat- 
patya, we are informed by our Brother, 
Devan Badhadur R. Ragunath Rao, of Ma- 
dras, a Sanskrit Encyclopaedia, plaoea Katft> 
pa (Kalipa) on the northern aide of the 
Himilayas, hence in Tibet. The same ia 
suted in chapter xii (Skanda) of BMAtmmta, 
VoL in, p. 325. 

519. The VAyu Purdma dedaies that Mora 
will re-establish the Kshatriya in the Nine- 
teenth coming Yuga. (See Pwt Ytmn #/ 
Thiosophy, page 483, "The Moryaa and 
KuthumL") 



UOTVS AND LILY 



379 



§ VIII 

THE LOTUS, AS A UNIVERSAL SYMBOL 

There are no ancient symbols, without a deep and philosophical 
meaning attached to them ; their importance and significance increasing 
with their antiquity. Such is the Lotus. It is the flower sacred to 
nature and her Gods, and represents the abstr act and the G)ncrete 
Universes, standing as the emblem of the productive powers of both 
spiritual and physical nature. It was held sacred from the remotest 
antiquity by the Aryan Hindus, the Egyptians, and the Buddhists after 
them ; revered in China and Japan, and adopted as a Christian emblem 
by the Greek and Latin Churches, who made of it a messenger as the 
Christians do now, who replace it with the water lily.'*® It had, and 
still has, its mystic meaning which is identical with every nation on the 
earth. We refer the reader to Sir William Jones.'** With the Hindus, 
the lotus is the emblem of the productive power of nature, through the 
agency of fire and water (spirit and matter). " Eternal! " says a verse 
in the Bhagavad Gitd, " I see Brahm the creator enthroned in thee 
above the lotus ! " ; and Sir W. Jones shows, as noted in the Stanzas, 
that the seeds of the lotus contain, even before they germinate, per- 
fectly-formed leaves, the miniature shapes of what one day, as per- 
fected plants, they will become. The lotus, in India, is the S3rmbol of 
prolifijc earth, and what is more, of Mount Meru. The four angels or 
genii of the four quarters of Heaven (the Maharajas, see Stamos) 
stand each on a lotus. The lotus is the two-fold type of the Divine 
and human hermaphrodite, being of dual sex, so to say. 

The spirit of Fire (or Heat), which stirs up, fructifies, and develops 
into concrete form everything (from its ideal prototype), which is bom 
of WATER or primordial Earth, evolved Brahma — with the Hindus. 
The lotus flower, represented as growing out of Vishnu's navel — that 
God resting on the waters of space and his Serpent of Infinity — is 
the most graphic allegory ever made : the Universe evolving from the 
central Sun, the point^ the ever-concealed germ. Lakshmi, who is the 



520. In the ChrittUn religion Gabriel, the 
Archangel, holding in hit hand a apray of 
water liliea, appeara to the Virgin Mary in 
e v er y picture of the Annunciation. Thia 
•pray, typifying fire and water, or the idea 
of creation and generation, aymboliaea prg" 
duty tks JoiiM idto Of the lotus in the hand 
of the Bodl^t who annoitncet to Mah&-Mft]ri, 
Gttttama'i mother, the birth of the world's 



Savior, Bnddha. Thua also, Osiris and Horua 
were represented by the Egyptians constantly 
in association with the lotua-flower, the two 
being Sun-gods or Fire (the Holy Ghost be* 
ing still typified by "tongues of fire." — 
Acts), 

521. See Sir William Jones' Dissertations 
Rslotimg to Asia, 



L 



380 



THE SECRET DOCTRINE 



female aspect of Vishnu,'" and who is called Padm&, the lotus, is 
likewise shown floating at " Creation," on a lotus flower, and during the 
"churning of the ocean" of space, springing from the "sea of milk," 
like Venus from the froth. 

. . . Then seated on a lotus 

Beaut/s bright goddess, peerless Sri, arose 

Out of the waves . . . 

sings an English Orientalist and poet (Sir Monier Williams). 

The underlying idea in this symbol is very beautiful, and it shows, 
furthermore, its identical parentage in all the religious systems. 
Whether in the lotus or water-lily shape it signifies one and the same 
philosophical idea — namely, the emanation of the objective from the 
subjective, divine Ideation passing from the abstract into the concrete 
or visible f dim For, as soon as Darkness — or rather that which is 
" darkness " for ignorance — has disappeared in its own reahn of eter- 
nal Light, leaving behind itself only its divine manifested Ideation, the 
creative Logoi have their understanding opened, and they see in the 
ideal world (hitherto concealed in the divine thought) the archetypal 
forms of all, and proceed to copy and build or fashion upon these 
models forms evanescent and transcendent. 

At this stage of action, the Demiurge"** is not yet the Architect 
Bom in the twilight of action, he has yet to first perceive the plan, to 
realize the ideal forms which lie buried in the bosom of Eternal Idea- 
tion, as the future lotus-leaves, the immaculate petals, are concealed 
within the seed of that plant . . . 

In chapter Ixxxi of the Ritual (Book of the Dead), called "Trans- 
formation into the Lotus," a head emerging from this flower, the god 
exclaims : " I am the pure lotus, emerging from the Luminous one. 
. . . I carry the messages of Horus. I am the pure lotus which copocs 
from the Solar Fields. . . ." 

The lotus-idea may be traced even in the Elohistic chapter, the 1st 
of Genesis, as stated in Isis. 



522. lAkshm! is Venas — Aphrodite* and, 
like the latter, ahe aprang from the froth of 
the ocean with a lotus in her hand. In the 
RdmAyana she is called Padmi. 

523. In Eaoteric philosophy the Demiurge 
or Logos, regarded as the Cixatok, is simply 
an abstract term, an idea, like "army." Aa 
the latter is the all-embracing term for a 
body of actire forces or working units — 
soldiers — so is the Demiurge the qnalita- 
tivc compound of a multitude of Creators 



or Builders. Bumouf, the great Orientalist, 
has seized the idea perfectly when nying 
that Brahffli doea not create the earth, any 
more than the rest of the universe. ** Having 
evolved himself from the soul of the world, 
once separated from the first cause, he evapor* 
ates with, and emanates all nature out of 
himself. He does not stand above it, but is \ 
mixed up with it; Brahmi and the universe . 
form one Being, each particle of whidi is in 
its essence Brahmi himself, who proce e d ed ' 
out of himself." 



THE EXOTERIC AND THE ESOTERIC 



381 



It is in this idea that we must look for the origin and explanation of 
the verse in the Jewish cosmogony, which reads : "And God said, Let 
the earth bring forth ... the fruit-tree yielding fruit after his kind, 
whose seed is in itself." In all the primitive religions, the " Son of the 
Father" is the creative God — i.e., His thought made visible; and 
before the Christian era, from the Trimurti of the Hindus down to the 
three kabalistic heads of the scriptures as explained by the Jews, the 
triune godhead of each nation was fully defined and substantiated in 
its all^nories. 

Such is the cosmic and ideal significance of this great symbol with 
the Eastern peoples. But, applied to practical and exoteric worship — 
which had also its esoteric symbology — the lotus became in time 
the carrier and container of a more terrestrial idea. No dogmatic 
religion has ever escaped the sexual element in it; and to this day 
it soils the moral beauty of the root idea. The following is quoted 
from the same Kabalistic MS. already mentioned: — 

Pointing to like signification was the lotus growing in the waters of the Nile. 
Its mode of growth peculiarly fitted it as a symbol of the generative activities. 
The flower of the lotus, which is the bearer of the seed for reproduction, as 
the result of its maturing, is connected by its placenta>like attachment with 
mother-earth, or the womb of Isis, through the water of the womb, that is, the 
river Nile, by means of the long cord-like stalk, the umbilicus. Nothing can be 
plainer than the symbol, and to make it perfect in its intended signification, a 
child is sometimes represented as seated in or issuing from the flower."^ Thus 
Osiris and Isis, the children of Chronos, or time without end, in the development 
of their nature-forces, in this picture become the parents of man under the 
name Horus. . . . ** 

We cannot lay too great stress upon the use of this generative function as 
a basis for a symbolical language and a scientific art-speech. Thought upon the 
idea leads at once to reflection upon the subject of creative cause. In its work- 
ings Nature is observed to have fashioned a wonderful piece of living mechanism 
governed by an added living soul; the life development and history of which 
soul, as to its whence, its present, and its whither, surpasses all efforts of the 
human intellect** The new bom is an ever-recurring miracle, an evidence that 



524. In Indimn PnrinM it U Vishnu, the 
first* and Brahmi, the second logos, or the 
ideal and practical creators, who are respec- 
tively represented, one as manifesting the 
tolas, the other as issuing from it 



f» 



525. See i IX, " Deus Lunns. 

526. Not the "efforts" of the trained psy- 
chic faculties of an Initiate into Eastern 
metaphysics, and the mysteries of creative 
Nature. It is the profane of the past ages 
who have degraded the pure ideal of cosmic 



creation into an emblem of mere human re- 
production and sexual functions: it is the 
esoteric teachings, and the initiates of the 
Future, whose mission it is, and will be, to 
redeem and ennoble once more the primitive 
conception so sadly profaned by its crude 
and gross application to exoteric dogmas and 
personations by theological and ecclesiastical 
religionists. The silent worship of abstract 
or noumtnal Nature, the only divine mani- 
festation, is the one ennobling religion of 
Humanity. 



382 



THE SECRET DOCTRINE 



within the workshop of the womb an intelligent creative power has intervened 
to fasten a living soul to a physical machine. The amazing wonderfulness of 
the fact attaches a holy sacredness to all connected with the organs of repro- 
duction, as the dwelling and place of evident constructive intervention of deity. 

This is a correct rendering of the underlying ideas of old, of the pure- 
ly pantheistic conceptions, impersonal and reverential, of the archaic 
philosophers of the prehistoric ages. Not so, however, when applied 
to sinful humanity, to the gross ideas attached to personality. There- 
fore, no pantheistic philosopher would fail to find the remarks that 
follow the above and which represent the anthropomorphism of Judaean 
symbology, other than dangerous for the sacredness of true religion, 
and fitting only our materialistic age, which is the direct outoxne and 
result of that anthropomorphic character. For this is the key-note to 
the entire spirit and essence of the Old Testament. " Therefore," goes 
on the MS., treating of the symbolism of art-speech of the Bible : — 

The locality of the womb is to be taken as the most holy placs, the sanctum 
SANCTORUM, and the veritable Temple op thb Living God.*" With man the 
possession of the woman has always been considered as an essential part of 
himself, to make one out of two, and jealously guarded as sacred. Even the part 
of the ordinary house or home consecrated to the dwelling of the wife was 
called the penetralia, the secret or sacred, and hence the metaphor of the Holy 
of Holies of sacred constructions taken from the idea of the sacredness of the 
organs of generation. Carried to the extreme of description** by metaphor, 
this part of the house is described in the Sacred Books as the "between the 
thighs of the house," and sometimes the idea is carried out constructively in 
the great door-opening of Churches placed inward between flanking buttresses. 

No such thought "carried to the extreme" ever existed among the 
old primitive Aryans. This is proven by the fact that in the Vcdic 
period their women were not placed apart from men in penetraiia, or 
" Zenanas." Their seclusion began when the Mohammedans — the next 
heirs to Hebrew symbolism after Christian ecclesiasticism — had con- 
quered the land and gradually enforced their ways and customs upon 
the Hindu. The pre- and post-Vedic woman was as free as man ; and 
no impure terrestrial thought was ever mixed with the religious sym- 



S27. Surely the words of the old Initiate 
into the primiiive mytteriea of Christianitj, 
"Knew ye not y# are the Temple of God" 
(1 Corinth, iik 16) could not be applied in 
this aenae to menf The mraninf may hare 
been, and woe wo, undeniably, in the minds 
of the Hebrew compilers of tbe Old Testa- 
ment And bere is tbe abjrss that lies 
be t ween the symbolism of the New Testa- 
ment and the Jewish canon. This gulf 
would have remained and ever widened, had 



not Christianity — eq>ectally and most cl*r^ 
ingly the Latin Church — thrown a bridge 
over it Modem Popery has now spanned 
it entirely, by its dogma of tbe two im- 
maculate conceptions, and the anthropo* 
morphic and at the same time idolatrous 
character it has conferred upon the Mother 
of its God. 

528. It was so carried only in the Hebrew 
Bible, and its servile copyist. Christian thco> 
logy. 



THE PURITY OF EARI.Y PHAI.LICISM 383 

bology of the early Aryans. The idea and application are purely 
Semitic. This is corroborated by the writer of the said intensely 
learned and Kabalistic revelation himself, when he closes the above- 
quoted passages by adding: — 

If to these organs as symbols of creative cosmic agencies the idea of the 
origin of measures as well as of time>periods can be attached, then indeed, in 
the constructions of the Temples as Dwellings of Deity, or of Jehovah, that part 
designated as the Holy of Holies, or the Most Holy place, should borrow its 
title from the recognized sacredness of the generative organs, considered as 
symbols of measures as well as of creative cause. With the ancient wisis, there 
was no name and no idea, and no symbol of a FntsT cause. . . . 

Most decidedly not. Rather never give a thought to it and leave if 
for ever nameless as the early Pantheists did, than degrade the sacred- 
ness of that Ideal of Ideals, by dragging down its S3rmbols into such 
anthropomorphic forms ! Here again one perceives the immense chasm 
invested with an '' original Sin " element the natural procreative f unc- 
Sincerity and Concealment. With the Brahmans, who have never 
between Aryan and Semitic religious thought: two opposite poles — 
^tions of mankind, it is a religious duty to have a son. A Brahman, 
in days of old, having accomplished his mission of human creator, 
retired to the jungle and passed the rest of his days in religious medita- 
tions. He had accomplished his duty to nature as mortal man and its 
co-worker, and henceforth gave all his thoughts to the spiritual im- 
mortal portion in himself, regarding the terrestrial as a mere illusion, 
an evanescent dream — which it is. With the Semite, it was diflFerent. 
He invented a temptation of flesh in a garden of Eden; showed his 
God (esoterically, the Tempter and the Ruler of Nature) cursing for 
ever an act, which was in the logical program of that nature.'** All 
this exoterically, as in the cloak and dead letter of Genesis and the rest ; 
and at the same time esoterically he regarded the supposed sin and 
FAU as an act so sacred, as to choose the organ, the perpetrator of the 
original sin, as the fittest and most sacred symbol to represent that 
God, who is shown as branding its entering into function as disobe- 
dience and everlasting sin ! 

Who can ever fathom the paradoxical depths of the Semitic mind? 
And this paradoxical element, minus its innermost significance, has 
now passed entirely into Christian theology and dogma! 

Whether the early Fathers of the Church knew the esoteric meaning 
of the Hebrew (Old) Testament, or whether only a few of them were 
aware of it, while the others remained ignorant of the secret, is for 

529. The tame idea U carried out exoteri- with great plagues," lest the Idng should es- 
cally in the incidents of Egjrpt The Lord cape punishment, and thus afford no pretext 
God tenqtts sorely Pharaoh and "plagues him for one more triumph to his "Chosen people." 



384 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

posterity to decide. One thing is certain, at any rate. As the eso- 
tericism of the New Testament agrees perfectly with that of the 
Hebrew Mosaic Books; and, .since, at the same time, a number of 
purely Egyptian symbols and pagan dogmas in general — the Trinity 
for example — have been copied by, and incorporated into, the Syn- 
optics and St. John, it becomes evident that the identity of those sym- 
bols was known to the writers of the New Testament, whoever they 
were. They must have been aware also of the priority of the Egyptian 
esotericism, since they have adopted several such symbols that typify 
purely Egyptian conceptions and beliefs — in their outward and inward 
meaning — and which are not to be found in the Jewish Canon. One 
of such is the water-lily in the hands of the Archangel in the early 
representations of his appearance to the Virgin Mary ; and these sym- 
bolical images are preserved to this day in the iconography of the Greek 
and Roman Churches. Thus water, fire, the Cross, as well as the Dove, 
the Lamb, and other sacred animals, with all their combinations, yield 
esoterically an identical meaning, and must have been accepted as an 
improvement upon Judaism pure and simple. 

For the Lotus and Water are among the oldest S)rmbols, and in their 
origin are purely Aryan, though they became common property during 
the branching-off of the fifth race. Let us give an example. Letters, 
as much as numbers, were all mystic, whether in combination or each 
taken separately. The most sacred of all is the letter M. It is both 
feminine and masculine, or androgyne, and is made to symbolize water, 
the great deep, in its origin. It is mystic in all the languages. Eastern 
and Western, and stands as a gl)rph for the waves, thus: /\/\/\ 
In the Aryan Esotericism, as in the Semitic, this letter has always stxxxl 
for the waters; e. g,, in Sanskrit makara — the tenth sign of the Zodiac 
— means a crocodile, or rather an aquatic monster associated always 
with water. The letter MA is equivalent to and corresponds with number 
5 — composed of a binary, the symbol of the two sexes separated, and of 
the ternary, syxtAxA of the third life, the progeny of the binary. This, 
again, is often symbolized by a Pentagon, the latter being a sacred sign, a 
divine Monogram. Maitreya is the secret name of the Fifth Buddha, 
and the /iCa/Jbi-Avatara of the Brahmans — the last Messiah who will 
come at the culmination of the Great Cycle. It is also the initial letter 
of the Greek Metis or Divine Wisdom; of Mimra, the " word " or 
Logos; and of Mithras (the Mihr), the Monad, Mystery. All these arc 
bom in, and from, the great Deep, and are the Sons of M&ya — the 
Mother; in Egypt, Mut; in Greece Minerva (divine wisdom), Mary, 
or Miriam, Myrrha, etc., of the Mother of the Christian Logos, and of 
May&, the mother of Buddha. Madhava and Madhavi are the titles of 
the most important gods and goddesses of the Hindu Pantheon. FinaUy, 



THE EGYPTIAN WTUS 385 

Mandala is in Sanskrit " a circle," or an orb (the ten divisions of the 
Rig Veda). The most sacred names in India begin with this letter 
generally — from Mahat, the first manifested intellect, and Mandara, 
the great mountain used by the gods to chum the Ocean, down to 
Mandakini, the heavenly Ganga (Ganges), Manu, etc., etc. 

Shall this be called a coincidence? A strange one it is then, indeed, 
when we find even Moses — found in the water of the Nile — hav- 
ing the symbolical consonant in his name. And Pharaoh's daughter 
" called his name Moses . . . because," she said, '7 drew him out of 
Water."'*® Besides which the Hebrew sacred name of God applied 
to this letter M is Meborach, the "Holy" or the "Blessed," and 
the name for the water of the Flood is M'bul. A reminder of the 
" three Maries " at the Crucifixion and their connexion with Mar, the 
Sea, or Water, may close this example. This is why in Judaism and 
Christianity the Messiah is always connected with Water, Baptism, the 
Fishes (the sign of the Zodiac called Minam in Sanskrit), and even 
with the Matsya (fish) Avatar, and the Lotus — the s)rmbol of the 
womb, or the water-lily, which is the same. 

In the relics of ancient Egypt, the greater the antiquity of the votive 
symbols and emblems of the objects exhumed, the oftener are the lotus 
flowers and the water found in connexion with the Solar Gods, The 
god Khnum — the moist power — water, as Thales taught it, being the 
principle of all things, sits on a throne enshrined in a lotus (Saitic 
epoch, Serapeum). The god Bes stands on a lotus, ready to devour his 
progeny (Ibid., Abydos), Thoth, the god of mystery and Wisdom, the 
sacred Scribe of Amenti, wearing the Solar disk as head gear, sits with 
a bull's head (the sacred bull of Mendes being a form of Thoth) and a 
human body, on a full blown lotus (IVth Dynasty). Finally it is the 
goddess Hekt, under her shape of a frog, who rests on the lotus, thus 
showing her connexion with water. And it is this frog-symbol, un- 
deniably the most ancient of their Egyptian deities, from whose unpoet- 
ical shape the Egyptologists have been vainly trying to unravel her 
mystery and functions. Its adoption in the Church by the early Chris- 
tians shows that they knew it better than our modem Orientalists. The 
" frog or toad goddess " was one of the chief cosmic deities connected 
with creation, on account of her amphibious nature, and chiefly because 
of her apparent resurrection, after long ages of solitary life enshrined 
in old walls, in rocks, etc. She not only participated in the organiza- 
tion of the world, together with Khnum, but was also connected with 

530. Exod. U. 10. Even to the aevcn Moaes Zipporah (sippara = the shining wave) 

daagfater* of the Midian priest, who, coining as wife (Bxod, ii. 16 #f s^q,). All this has 

to draw the water, had Moses water their the same secret meaning. 
Hock, for which service the Mkiian gives to 



386 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

the dogma of resurrection}*^ There must have been some very pro- 
found and sacred meaning attached to this symbol, since, notwithstand- 
ing the risk of being charged with a disgusting form of zoolatry, the 
early Egyptian Christians adopted it in their Churches. A frog or 
toad enshrined in a lotus flower, or simply without the latter emblem, 
was the form chosen for the Church lamps, on which were engraved 
the words " I am the resurrection " — " "Eyw cifu amoreun^." "* These 
frog goddesses are also found on all the mummies. 



§ IX 
THE MOON, DEUS LUNUS, PHOEBE 

This archaic s}rmboI is the most poetical of all symbols, as also the 
most philosophical. The ancient Greeks brought it into prominence, 
and the modem poets have worn it threadbare. The Queen of Night, 
riding in the majesty of her peerless light in heaven, throwing all, even 
Hesperos, into darkness, and spreading her silver mantle over the whole 
sidereal world, has ever been a favorite theme with all the poets of 
Christendom, from Milton and Shakespeare down to the latest versi- 
fier. But the refulgent lamp of night, with her suite of stars unnum- 
bered, spoke only to the imagination of the profane. Until lately. 
Religion and Science had nought to do with the beautiful m)rthos. 
Yet, the cold chaste moon, she, in the words of Shelley — 

Who makes all beautiful on which she smiles 
That wandering shrine of soft, yet icy flame, 
Which ever is transformed, yet still the same. 
And warms not but illumines. . . . 

Stands in closer relations to Earth than any other sidereal orb. The 
Sun is the giver of life to the whole planetary system; the Moon is the 
giver of life to our globe ; and the early races understood and knew it, 
even in their infancy. She is the Queen and she is the King, and was 
King Soma before she became transformed into Phoebe and the chaste 
Diana. She is pre-eminently the deity of the Christians, through the 
Mosaic and Kabalistic Jews, though the civilized world may have re- 
mained ignorant of the fact for long ages ; in fact, ever since the last 

531. With the Egyptian* it was the resur* statement about the Church lamps and in- 
rection kx rebirth after 3,000 years of puri- scrlptions it is the learned ex-director of the 
fication, either in Devachan or ** the fields Bulaq Museum, Mr. Gaston Maspero, who 
of bliss." must be held responsible. (See his GuitU 

532. Such ** frog-ffoddcBses *' may be seen du Visit eur au Mus^g dt Boniaq^ pafe 
at Bulaq, in the Cairo Museum. For the 146.) 



A GLANCE AT THE LUNAR MYTH 387 

initiated Father of the Church died, carrying with him into his grave 
the secrets of the pagan temples. For the " Fathers " — such as Origen 
or Clemens Alexandrinus — the Moon was Jehovah's living symbol: 
the giver of Life and the giver of Death, the disposer of being — in our 
World. For, if Artemis was Luna in Heaven, and, with the Greeks, 
Diana on Earth, who presided over child-birth and life: with the Egyp- 
tians, she was Hekat (Hecate) in Hell, the goddess of Death, who ruled 
over magic and enchantments. More than this: as the personified 
moon, whose phenomena are triadic, Diana-Hecate-Luna is the three 
in one. For she is Diva triformis, tergemina, triceps — three heads on 
one neck,"" like Brahma- Vishnu-Siva. Hence she is the prototype of 
our Trinity, which has not always been entirely male. The number 
seven, so prominent in the Bible, so sacred in its seventh (Sabbath) 
day, came to the Jews from Antiquity, deriving its origin from the 
four-fold number 7 contained in the 28 days of the lunar month, each 
septenary portion thereof being typified by one quarter of the moon. 

It is worth the trouble of presenting in this work a bird's-eye view of 
the origin and development of the lunar myth and worship in historical 
antiquity, on our side of the globe. Its earlier origin is untraceable by 
exact science, rejecting as it does tradition ; while for Theology, which, 
under the guidance of the crafty Popes, has put a brand on every frag- 
ment of literature that does not bear the imprimatur of the Church of 
Rome, its archaic history is a sealed book. Whether the Egyptian or 
the Aryan Hindu religious philosophy is the more ancient — and the 
Secret Doctrine says it is the latter — does not much matter in this 
instance, as the lunar and solar "worship" are the most ancient in the 
world. Both have survived, and prevail to this day throughout the 
whole world, with some openly, with others — e. g,, in Christian sym- 
bolics — secretly. The cat, a lunar symbol, was sacred to Isis, herself 
the Moon in one sense, as Osiris was the Sun. The cat is often seen 
on the top of the Sistrum in the hand of the goddess. This animal was 
held in great veneration in the city of Bubastis, which went into deep 
mourning after the death of every sacred cat, because Isis, as the 
Moon, was particularly worshiped in this city of mysteries. The as- 
tronomical symbolism connected with it has already been given in 
Section I of " S)rmbolism," and no one has better described it than 
Mr. G. Massey, in his Lectures and in The Natural Genesis. The 
eye of the cat, it is said, seems to follow the lunar phases in its growth 
and decline, and its orbs shine like two stars in the darkness of night. 
Hence the mythological allegory which shows Diana hiding under the 
shape of a cat in the Moon, when, in company with other deities, she 

533. The goddess Tpl/iop^tOf in the statuary of Alkamenes. 



388 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

was seeking to escape the pursuit of Typhon.^^* The moon in Egypt 
was both the " Eye of Horus " and the " Eye of Osiris/' the Sun. 

The same with the Cynocephalus. The dog-headed ape was a glyph 
to symbolize the sun and moon, in turn, though the Cynocephalus is 
more a Hermetic than a religious symbol. For it is the hieroglyph of 
Mercury, the planet, as of the Mercury of the Alchemical philosophers, 
" as," say the Alchemists, " Mercury has to be ever near Isis, as her 
minister, as without Mercury neither Isis nor Osiris can accomplish 
anything in the great work." Cynocephalus, whenever represented 
with the Caduceus, the Crescent, or the Lotus, is a glyph of the " philo- 
sophical " Mercury ; but when seen with a reed, or a roll of parch- 
ment, he stands for Hermes, the secretary and adviser of Isis, as 
Hanuman filled the same office with Rama. 

Though the regular Sun- Worshipers, the Parsis, are few, yet not 
only is the bulk of the Hindu mythology and history based upon and 
interblended with these two worships, but so is also the Christian re- 
ligion itself. From their origin down to our modem day it has colored 
the theologies of both the Roman Catholic and Protestant Churches. 
The diflFerence, indeed, between the Aryan Hindu and the Aryan Euro- 
pean faiths is very small, if only the fundamental ideas of both are 
taken into consideration. Hindus are proud of calling themselves 
SHrya- and Chandravanias (of the Solar and Lunar dynasties). The 
Christians pretend to regard it as idolatry, and yet they adhere to a 
religion entirely based upon the solar and lunar worships. It is useless 
and vain for the Protestants to exclaim against the Roman Catholics 
for their " Mariolatry," based on the ancient cult of lunar goddesses, 
when they themselves worship Jehovah, pre-eminently a lunar god, and 
when both Churches have accepted in their theologies the "5'ii»"- 
Christ and the lunar trinity. 

What is known of Chaldaean Moon- Worship, of the Babylonian god. 
Sin, called by the Greeks " Deus Lunus," is very little, and that little 
is apt to mislead the profane student who fails to grasp the esoteric 
significance of the s)rmbols. As popularly known to the ancient profane 
philosophers and writers (for those who were initiated were pledged 
to silence) the Chaldaeans were the worshipers of the moon under her 
(and his) various names, just as were the Jews, who came after them. 

In the unpublished MS. on the Art Speech, already mentioned, giving 
a key to the formation of the ancient (symbolical) language, a logical 
raison d'etre is brought forward for this double worship. It is written 
by a wonderfully well-informed and acute scholar and Mystic, who 
gives it in the comprehensive form of a hypothesis. The latter, how- 

S34. Vide the MgUmorpkoses of Orid. 



A KEY NOTE TO THE MOON 389 

ever, becomes forcibly a proven fact in the history of religious evolu- 
tion in human thought, to anyone who has ever had a glimpse into the 
secret of ancient Symbology. Thus, he says : — 

^One of the first occupations among men, connected with those of actual ne- 
cessity, would be the perception of time periods,"" marked on the vaulted arch 
of the heavens sprung and rising over the level floor of the horizon, or the 
plain of still water. These would come to be marked as those of day and night, 
of the phases of the moon, of its stellar or ssmodic revolutions, and of the period 
of the solar year with recurrence of the seasons, and with the application to such 
periods of the natural measure of day or night, or of the day divided into the 
light and the dark. It would also be discovered that there was a longest and 
shortest solar day, and two solar days of equal day and night, within the period 
of the solar year; and the points in the year of these could be marked with 
the greatest precision in the starry groups of the heavens or the constellations, 
subject to that retrograde movement thereof, which in time would require a 
correction by intercalation, as was the case in the description of the Flood, 
where correction of 150 days was made for a period of 600 years, during which 
confusion of landmarks had increased. . . . This would naturally come to pass 
. . . with all races in all time; and such knowledge must be taken to have been 
inherent in the human race, prior to what we call the historic period. . . ." 

On this basis, the author seeks for some natural physical function possessed 
in common by the human race, and connected with the periodical manifestations, 
such that " the connexion between the two kinds of phenomena . . . became fixed 
in popular usage." He finds it ** (a) in the feminine physiological phenomena 
every lunar month of 28 days," or 4 weeks of 7 days each, so that 13 
occurrences of the period should happen in 364 days, which is the solar week 
jrear of 52 weeks of 7 days each, (b) The quickening of the fetus is marked by 
a period of 126 days, or 18 weeks of 7 days each, (c) That period which is 
called ''the period of viability " is one of 210 days, or 30 weeks of 7 days each. 
(d) The period of parturition is accomplished in 280 days, or a period of 40 
weeks of 7 days each, or 10 lunar months of 28 days each, or of 9 calendar 
months of 31 days each, counting on the royal arch of heavens for the measure 
of the period of traverse from the darkness of the womb to the light and glory 
of conscious existence, that continuing inscrutable mystery and miracle. . . . 
Thus the observed periods of time marking the workings of the birth function 
would naturally become a basis of astronomical calculation. . . . We may almost 
affirm . . . that this was the mode of reckoning among all nations, either inde- 
pendently, or intermediately and indirectly by tuition. It was the mode with 
the Hebrews, for even today they calculate the calendar by means of the 354 
and 355 of the lunar year, and we possess a special evidence that it was the 
mode with the ancient Egyptians, as to which this is the proof: — 

535. Ancient Mythology includes ancient Sanger appointed to keep time during the 

Astronomy as well as Astrology. The plan* daily solar and lunar phenomena, and was 

et« were the hands pointing out, on the dial otherwise connected with the God and God- 

of our solar system, the hours of certain per> dcss of Light, 
iodical crents. Thus, Mercury was IA« m#- 



390 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

" The basic idea underlying the religious philosophy of the Hebrews was that 
God contained all things within himself;*** and that man was his image, man 
including woman. . . . The place of the man and woman with the Hebrews 
was among the Egyptians occupied by the bull and the cow, sacred to Osiris 
and Isis,*" who were represented, respectively, by a man having a bull's head, 
and a woman having the head of a cow, which symbols were worshiped. 
Notoriously Osiris was the Sun and the river Nile, the tropical year of 365 days, 
which number is the value of the word Neiios, and the bull, as he was also the 
principle of fire and of life-giving force, while Isis was the Moon, the bed of 
the river Nile, or the Mother Earth, for the parturient energies of which water 
was a necessity, the lunar year of 354-364 days, the time-maker of the periods 
of gestation, and the cow marked by, or with, the crescent new moon/* . . . 

" But the use of the cow of the Egyptians for the women of the Hebrews was 
not intended as of any radical difference of signification, but a concurrence in 
the teaching intended, and merely as a substitution of a S3rmbol of common im- 
port, which was this, viz., the period of parturition with the cow and the woman 
was held to be the same, or 280 days, or ten lunar months of four weeks each. 
And in this period consisted the essential value of this animal symbol, whose 
mark was that of the crescent moon.*** . . . These parturient and natural periods 
are found to have been subjects of S3rmbolism all over the world. They were 
thus used by the Hindus, and are found to be most plainly set forth by the 
ancient Americans, in the Richardson and Gest tablets, in the Palenque Cross; 
and manifestly lay at the base of the formation of the calendar forms of the 
Mayas of Yucatan, the Hindus, the Assyrians, and the ancient Babylonians, as 
well as the Egyptians and old Hebrews. The natural s3rmbols . . . would be 
either the phallus or the phallus and yoni, ... or male and female. Indeed, 
the words translated by the generalizing terms male and female, in the 27th 
verse of the 1st chapter of Genesis are . . . sacr and n'cabvah, or literally, phallus 
and yoni,*** while the representation of the phallic emblems would barely indi- 
cate the genital members of the human body, when their functions and the 
development of the seed-vesicles emanating from them was considered; then 
would come into indication a mode of measures of lunar time, and, through 
lunar, of solar time." . . . 

This is the physiological or anthropological key to the Moon s)rmbol. 
The key that opens the mystery of theogony, or the evolution of the 
Manvantaric gods, is more complicated, and has nothing phallic in it. 
All is mystical and divine there. But the Jews, beyond connecting 
Jehovah directly with the Moon as a generative god, preferred to ignore 
the higher hierarchies, and have made of some of them (zodiacal con- 
stellations and planetary gods) their Patriarchs, thus euhemerizing the 

536. A caricatured and dwarfed Vedintin the bull of Siva and the cow l epiea eu ting 
notion of Parabrahmam containing within if* several Saktis — goddesaea. 

self the whole Univerae aa being that bound- 538. Hence the worship of the moon by 

less Universe itself, and thert existing HOtking the Ilebrewa. 

outside of itself, 539. *' Mate and female, created be 

537. Just as they are to this day io India, them." 



THE TIME PERIODS 391 

purely theosophical idea and dragging it down to the level of sinful 
humanity."*^ The MS. from which the above is extracted explains 
very clearly to what hierarchy of gods Jehovah belonged, and who this 
Jewish God was ; for it shows in clear language that which the writer 
has always insisted upon — namely, that the God with which the Chris- 
tians have burdened themselves was no better than the lunar S)rmbol of 
the reproductive or generative faculty in nature. They have ever ig- 
nored even the Hebrew secret god of the Kabalists, Ain-Soph, as 
grand as Parabrahmam in the earliest Kabalistic and mystical concep- 
tions. But it is not the Kabala of Rosenroth that can ever give the 
true original teachings of Simeon-Ben-Iochai, as metaphysical and 
philosophical as any. And how many are there among the students of 
the Kabala who knew anything of them except in their distorted 
Latin translations? Let us glance at the idea which led the ancient 
Jews to adopt a substitute for the ever Unknowable, and which has 
misled the Christians into mistaking the substitute for the reality. 

** If to these organs (phallus and yoni) as symbols of creative cosmic agencies 
the idea of . . . time periods can be attached, then, indeed, in the construction 
of Temples as Dwellings of Deity, or of Jehovah, that post designated as the 
Holy of Holies, or the most High Place should borrow its title from the recog- 
nized sacredness of the generative organs, considered as S3rmbols of measures 
as well as of creative Cause." 

"With the ancient wise, there was no name, and no idea, and no symbol, 
of a First Cause.*** With the Hebrews, the indirect conception of such was 
couched in a term of negation of comprehension — viz., Ain-Soph, or the With- 
out Bounds. But the symbol of its first comprehensible manifestation, was the 
conception of a circle with its diameter line.*** ... to carry at once a geometric, 
phallic, and astronomic idea . . . for the one takes its birth from the nought 
or the Circle, without which it could not be, and from one, or primal one, spring 
the nine digits, and, geometrically, all plane shapes. So in the Kabala this 
Circle, with its diameter line, is the picture of the ten Sephiroth or Emanations, 
composing the Adam Kadmon, the Archetypal Man, the creative origin of all 
things. . . . This idea of connecting the circle and its diameter line, that is, 
number ten, with the signification of the reproductive organs, and the Most Holy 
Place, was carried out constructively in the King's Chamber, or Holy of Holies, 
of the great Pyramid, in the Tabernacle of Moses, and in the Holy of Holies 
of the Temple of Solomon. ... It is the picture of a double-womb, for in 
Hebrew the letter hi pl is at the same time the number 5 and S3rmbol of the 
womb, and twice 5 is 10, or the phallic number." 

This "double womb" also shows the duality of the idea carried from 

540. See section *' Holy of Holies" in " Eternsl Canse." and cannot, therefore, be 
the " Sjrmbolism " of Book H. spoken of as a '* First Cause/' a tern imply- 

541. Because it was too sacred. It is n- ing the absence of any cause, at one time. 
referred to as That in the Vedas: it is the 542. See the Proem of Book I, Part I. 



392 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

the highest, spiritual, down to the lowest or terrestrial plane ; and by 
the Jews limited to the latter. With them, therefore, the number 7 has 
acquired the most prominent place in their exoteric religion, a cult of 
external forms and empty rituals; as their Sabbath, for instance, the 
seventh day sacred to their deity, the moon, symbolical of the genera- 
tive Jehovah. While with other nations the number seven was typical 
of theogonic evolution, of cycles, cosmic planes, and the Seven Forces 
and Occult Powers in Kosmos, as a boundless whole, whose first upper 
triangle was unreachable to the finite intellect of man — while other 
nations, therefore, busied themselves, in their forcible limitation of 
Kosmos in Space and Time, only with its septenary manifested plane, 
the Jews centered this number solely in the moon, and based all their 
sacred calculations thereupon. Hence we find the thoughtful author 
of the MS. just quoted, remarking, in reference to the metrology of 
the Jews that: 

If 20,612 be multiplied by 4/3 the product will afford a base for the ascer- 
tainment of the mean revolution of the moon, and if this product be again mul- 
tiplied by 4/3, this continued product will afford a base for finding the exact 
period of the mean solar year, . . . this form . . . becoming, for the finding^ 
of astronomical periods of time, of very great service. 

This double number (male and female) is symbolized also in some 
well-known idols : e, g,, 

Ardhanari-tsvara, the Isis of the Hindus, Eridanus, or Ardan, or the Hebrew 
Jordan, or source of descent. She is standing on a lotus-leaf flowing on the 
water. But the signification is, that it is androgyne or hermaphrodite, that is 
phallus and yoni combined, the number 10, the Hebrew letter Jod ^, the con- 
tainment of Jehovah. She, or rather she-he, gives the minutes of the same drdc 
of 360 degrees. 

" Jehovah " in its best aspect is Binah, " the Upper mediating 
Mother, the Great Sea or Holy Spirit " ; therefore rather a synonym 
of Mary, the Mother of Jesus, than of his Father ; that " Mother, being 
the Latin Mare," the Sea, is here also, Venus, the Stella del Mare, or 
" Star of the Sea." 

The ancestors of the mysterious Akkadians — the Chandra- or Indo- 
vanias, the Lunar Kings whom tradition shows reigning at Pra)raga 
(Allahabad) ages before our era — had come from India, and brought 
with them the worship of their forefathers, of Soma, and his son 
Budha, which afterwards became that of the Chaldaeans. Yet such 
adoration, apart from popular Astrolatry and Heliolatry, was in no 
sense idolatry. No more, at any rate, than the modem Roman Cath- 
olic symbolism which connects their Virgin Mary — the Magna Mater 
of the Syrians and Greeks — with the Moon. 



CX)PIES AND ORIGINALS 393 

Of this worship, the most pious Roman Catholics feel quite proud, 
and loudly confess to it. In a Memoire to the French Academy, the 
Marquis de Mirville says : — 

It is only natural that, as an unconscious prophecy, Ammon-Ra should be 
his mothfr's husband, since the Magna Mater of the Christians is precisely the 
spouse of that son she conceives. . . . We (Christians) can understand now 
why Neithis throws radiance on the sun, while remaining the Moon, since the 
Virgin, who is the Queen of Heaven, as Neith was, clothes herself in her 
radiance, and clothes in his turn the Christ-Sun. " Tu vestis solem et te soi 
vestit" . . . 

is sung by the Roman Catholics during their service, and he adds : 

We [Christians] understand also how it is that the famous inscription at Sais 
should have stated that "none has ever lifted my peplum (veil)," considering 
that this sentence, literally translated, is the summary of what is sung in the 
Church on the day of the immaculate conception.**^ 

Surely nothing could be more sincere than this ! It justifies entirely 
what Mr. Gerald Massey has said in his Lecture on " Luniolatry, 
Ancient and Modem " : — 

The man in the moon (Osiris-Sut, Jehovah-Satan, Christ- Judas, and other 
Lunar twins) is often charged with bad conduct. ... In the lunar phenomena 
the moon was one as the moon, which was two-fold in sex, and three-fold in 
character — as mother, child, and adult male. Thus the child of the moon 
became the consort of his own mother! It could not be helped if there was to 
be any reproduction. He was compelled to be his own father 1 These relation- 
ships were repudiated by later sociology, and the primitive man in the moon 
got tabooed. Yet, in its latest, most inexplicable phase, this has become the 
central doctrine of the grossest superstition the world has seen, for these lunar 
phenomena and their humanly represented relationships, the incestuous in- 
cluded, are the very foundations of the Christian Trinity in Unity. Through 
ignorance of the symbolism, the simple representation of early time has become 
the most profound religious mystery in modem Luniolatry. The Roman Church,, 
without being in any wise ashamed of the proof, portrays the Virgin Mary 
arrayed with the sun, and the homed moon at her feet, holding the lunar infant 
in her arms — as child and consort of the mother moon. The mother, child, 
and adult male, are fundamental. 

In this way it can be proved that our Christology is mummified mythology,, 
and legendary lore, which have been palmed off upon us in the Old Testament 
and the New, as divine revelation uttered by the very voice of God. 

A charming allegory is found in the Zohar, one which unveils better 
than anything ever did the true character of Jehovah or YHVH in the 
primitive conception of the Hebrew Kabalists. It is now found in the 
l^ilosophy of Ibn Gebirol's Kabbalah, translated by Isaac Myer. Says 
our author : 

S43. ASCHASOLOGY OP TBI ViRGllf MoTHtK, p. 117. 



394. THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

In the introduction written by R'Hiz*qcc-yah, which is very old, and forms 
part of the Brody edition of the Zohar (1, 56 sq.) is an account of a journey 
taken by R. Erazar, son of R. Shim-on b. lo'hai, and Rabbi Abbah. 

They met a man with a heavy burden and asked his name; but he 
refused to give it and proceeded to explain to them Thorah (Law). 

They asked: "Who caused thee thus to walk and carry such a heavy load?** 
He answered : " The letter ^," (Yod, which = 10, and is the symbolical letter of 
Kether and the essence and germ of the Holy name niiT* YHVH). . . . They 
said to him : ** If thou wilt tell us the name of thy father, we will kiss the dust 

of thy feet." He replied: "As to my father, he had his dwelling in the Great 
Sea, and was a fish therein [like Vishnu and Dagon or Oannes], which [first] 
destroyed the great sea . . . and he was great and mighty and 'Ancient of 
Days,' until he swallowed all the other fishes in the (Great) Sea." ... R. 
El'azar listened and said to him: "Thou art the Son of the Holy Flame, thou 
art the Son of Rab Ham-'fiMii-ah Sabah (the old) [the fish in Aramaic or Chaldee 
is nun (noon)] thou art the Son of the Light of the Thorah," [Dharma] etc."* 

Then the author explains that the feminine Sephiroth, Binah, is 
termed by the Kabalist the great sea: therefore Binah, whose divine 
names are Jehovah, Yah, and Elohim, is simply the Chaldaean Tiamat, 
the female power, the Thalatth of Berosus, who presides over the 
Chaos, and was made out later by Christian theology to be the serpent 
and the Devil. She-He (Yah-hovah) is the supernal (Heh, and Eve). 
This Yah-hovah then, or Jehovah, is identical with our Chaos — Father, 
Mother, Son — on the material plane and in the purely physical World. 
Daemon and Deus at one and the same time ; the stm and moon, good 
and evil, God and Demon. 

Ltmar magnetism generates life, preserves and destroys it, psychic- 
ally as well as physically. And if, astronomically, she is one of the 
seven planets of the ancient world, in theogony she is one of the regents 
thereof ; with Christians now as much as with Pagans, the former re- 
ferring to her under the name of one of their archangels, and the 
latter imder that of one of their gods. 

Therefore the meanmg of the "fairy tale" translated by Chwolsohn 
from an old Chaldaean MS. translated into Arabic, about Qu-tamy 
being instructed by the idol of the moon, is easily understood {vide 
Book III). Seldenus tells us the secret as well as Maimonides.**** 
The worshipers of the Teraphim (the Jewish Oracles) " carved images 
and claimed that the light of the principal stars (planets) permeating 
these through and through, the angelic Virtues (or the regents of the 
stars and planets) conversed with them, teaching them many most 
useful things and arts." And Seldenus explains that the Teraphim 
vftTt built and composed after the position of certain planets, those 

^44. Qabbalah, Imac Ujtr, p. 33S #t s^q, 544 a. Morg Nevochim, Book DI, ch. 



SOLAR-LUNAR WORSHIP IN THE CHURCH 395 

which the Greeks called oroixcta, and according to figures that were 
located in the sky and called dAc^TT^ptoi, or the tutelary gods. Those 
who traced out the aroixda were called oroix'^uafiaTucoi, or the diviners 

by the crrocxcta.*** 

It is such sentences, however, in the Nabathean Agriculture, that 
have f righfened the men of science and made them proclaim the work 
"either an apocrypha or a fairy tale, unworthy of the notice of an 
Academician." At the same time, as shown, zealous Roman Catholics 
and Protestants tore it metaphorically to pieces; the former because 
"if described the worship of demons," the latter because it is "ungodly." 
They are all wrong, once more. It is not a fairy tale; and as far as 
r^;ards pious Churchmen, the same worship may be shown in the 
Scriptures, however disfigured by translation. Solar and Lunar wor- 
ship, as well as that of the Stars and Elements, are traced, and figure 
in the Christian theology ; defended by Papists, they are stoutly denied 
by the Protestants only at their own risk and peril. Two instances 
may be given. 

Ammianus Marcellinus teaches that ancient divinations were always 
accomplished with the help of the Spirits of the Elements, " Spiritus 
eletnentorum," and in Greek wvcv/iara t«5v crroixctwv.*** 

But it is found now that the planets, the Elements, and the Zodiac, 
were figured not only in Heliopolis by the twelve stones called " the 
mysteries of the elements," elementorum arcana, but also in Solomon's 
temple, and, as pointed out by various writers, in several old Italian 
churches and even at Notre Dame de Paris, where they can be seen to 
this day. 

No symbol — the sun included — was more complex in its manifold 
meanings than the lunar symbol. The sex was, of course, dual. With 
some it was male, e. g., the Hindu " King Soma," and the Chal- 
daean 5*111; with other nations it was female, the beauteous goddesses 
Diana-Luna, Ilithyia, Lucina. In Tauris, human victims were sacri- 
ficed to Artemis, a form of the lunar goddess ; the Cretans called her 
Diktynna, and the Medes and Persians Anaitis, as shown by an inscrip- 
tion of Koloe: •AprcfuSt •Avoem. But, we are now concerned chiefly 
with the most chaste and pure of the virgin goddesses, Luna-Artemis, 
to whom Pamphos was the first to give the surname of KaAAiony, and of 
whom Hippolytos wrote KaAA/an; iroXv mpOivuiv^^'' This Artemis- 
Lochia, the goddess that presided at conception and childbirth (Iliad, 
Pausanias, etc., etc.), is, in her functions and as the triple Hekate, the 
Orphic deity, the predecessor of the god of the Rabbins and pre- 
Christian Kabalists, and his lunar type. The goddess Tpifu>p<^ was 

545. Dt DUt Syriis, Teraph., II. Synt p. 31. FtJ# infra, the Teraphim. 
546. XXI, 1. 547. See Pausanias, viii, 35, 8. 



396 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

the personified symbol of the various and successive aspects represented 
by the moon in each of her three phases ; and this interpretation was 
already that of the Stoics,'** while the Orpheans explained the epithet 
(TpifwpifH)^) by the three kingdoms of nature over which she reigned 
Jealous, blood-thirsty, revengeful and exacting, Hekate-Luna is a 
worthy counterpart of the "jealous God " of the Hebrew prophets. 

The whole riddle of the solar and lunar worship, as now traced in the 
churches, hangs indeed on this world-old mystery of lunar phenomena. 
The correlative forces in the "Queen of Night," that lie latent for 
modem science, but are fully active to the knowledge of Eastern adepts, 
explain well the thousand and one images under which the moon was 
represented by the ancients. It also shows how much more profoundly 
learned in the Selenic mysteries were the ancients than are now our 
modem astronomers. The whole Pantheon of the lunar gods and god- 
desses, Nephthys or Neith, Proserpina, Melitta, Cybelc, Isis, Astartc, 
Venus, and Hekate, on the one hand, and Apollo, Dionysos, Adonis, 
Bacchus, Osiris, Atys, Thammuz, etc., etC;, on the other, all show on 
the face of their names and titles — those of " Sons " and " Husbands " 
of their mothers — their identity with the Christian Trinity. In every 
religious system the gods were made to merge their functions as 
Father, Son, and Husband, into one, and the goddesses were identified 
as " Wife, Mother, and Sister " of the male God ; the former s)mthe- 
sizing the human attributes as the " Sun, the giver of Life," the latter 
merging all the other titles in the grand synthesis known as Maia, 
Maya, Maria, etc., a generic name. Maia, in its forced derivation, 
has come to mean with the Greeks, " mother," from the root mo 
(nurse), and even gave its name to the month of May, which was 
sacred to all those goddesses before it became consecrated to Mary.*** 
Its primitive meaning, however, was Maya, DurgA, translated by the 
Orientalists as " inaccessible," but meaning in truth the " unreachable'' 
in the sense of illusion and unreality ; as being the source and cause 
of spells, the personification of Illusion. 

In religious rites the moon served a dual purpose. Personified as 
a female goddess for exoteric purposes, or as a male god in allegory 
and symbol, in occult philosophy our satellite was regarded as a sexless 
Potency to be well studied, because it was to be dreaded. With the 
initiated Aryans, Kaldi, Greeks and Romans, Soma, Sin, Artemis 
Soteira (the hermaphrodite Apollo, whose attribute is the lyre, and the 
bearded Diana of the bow and arrow), Deus Lunus, and especially 

548. Cornutus, Dt Naiura Dtorum, Maj to the Virgin, to the iMffan Plutarch, 
xxxiv, 1. ^^^ shows that '* Maj is sacred to Mmt 

(Maia) or VesU" {Antus Gtllmt, word 

549. The Roman Catholics are indebted Maia)— our nx>thcr-«arth. ottr none nd 
for the idea of consecrating the month of nourisher personified. 



THE MOON^ BISEXUAI. 



397 



Osiris-lunus and Thoth-liuius,**® were the occult potencies of the moon. 
But whether male or female, whether Thoth or Minerva, Soma or As- 
toreth, the Moon is the Occult mystery of mysteries, and more a sym- 
bol of evil than of good. Her seven phases (original, esoteric division) 
are divided into three astronomical phenomena and four purely psy- 
chic phases. That the moon was not always reverenced is shown in 
the Mysteries, in which the death of the moon-god (the three phases 
of gradual waning and final disappearance) was allegorized by the 
moon standing for the genius of evil that triumphs for the time over 
the light and life-giving god (the sun), and all the skill and learning 
of the ancient Hierophants in Magic was required to turn this triumph 
into a defeat. 

It was the most ancient worship of all, that of the third Race of our 
Round, the Hermaphrodites, to whom the male-moon became sacred, 
when after the " Fall " so-called, the sexes had become separated. 
" Deus Lunus " then became an androgyne, male and female in turn ; 
to serve finally, for purposes of sorcery, as a dual power, to the Fourth 
Root-race, the Atlanteans. With the Fifth (our own) the lunar-solar 
worship divided the nations into two distinct, antagonistic camps. It 
led to events described aeons later in the Mahabharatan War, which to 
the Europeans is the fabulous, to the Hindus and Occultists the histor- 
ical, strife between the SHryavanias and the Indovanias. Originating 
in the dual aspect of the moon, the worship of the female and male 
principles respectively, it ended in distinct solar and lunar cults. Among 
the Semitic races, the sun was for a very long time feminine and the 
moon masculine — the latter notion being adopted by them from the 
Atlantean traditions. The moon was called "the Lord of the sun," 
BelShemesh,^^^ before the Shemesh worship. The ignorance of the 
incipient reasons for such a distinction, and of occult principles, led the 
nations into anthropomorphic idol-worship. But the religion of every 
ancient nation had been primarily based upon the Occult manifestations 
of a purely abstract Force or Principle now called " God." The very 



550. ThothLunut it «' BudhaSoma " 
India, or " Mercury and the Moon." 



of 



551. Daring that period which It absent 
from the Mosaic books — from the exile of 
Eden to the allegorical Flood — the Jews 
worshiped with the rest of the Semites 
Dayanisi 1 V t M j « *T " the Ruler of Men/* 
the "Judge." or the Sum. Though the Jew- 
ish canon and Christianism have made the 
sun become the " Lord God " and Jehovah 
in the Bible, yet the latter is full of indis- 
creet traces of the androgyne Deity, which 
was Jehovah the sun, and Astoreth the moon 



in its female aspect, and quite free from the 
present metaphorical element given to it 
God is a "consuming fire," appears in, and is 
"encompassed hy fire." It was not only in 
vision that Ezeldel (vliL 16) saw the Jews 
" worshiping the sun." The Baal of the Is- 
raelites (the Shemesh of the Moabites and 
the Moloch of the Ammonites) was the iden- 
tical " Sun- Jehovah," and he is till now "the 
King of the Host of Heaven," the Sun, as 
much as Astoreth was the " Queen of Heav- 
en " — or the moon. The " Sun of Right- 
eousness" has become a metaphorical ex- 
pression only now. 



398 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

establishment of such worship shows, in its details and rites, that the 
philosophers who evolved those systems of nature, subjective and ob- 
jective, possessed profound knowledge, and were acquainted with many 
facts of a scientific nature. For besides being purely Occult, the rites 
of lunar worship were based, as just shown, upon a knowledge of phys- 
iology (quite a modern science with us), psychology, sacred mathe- 
matics, geometry and metrology, in their right applications to symbols 
and figures, which are but glyphs, recording observed natural and scien- 
tific facts; in short, upon a most minute and profotmd knowledge of 
nature. Lunar magnetism generates life, preserves and kills it Soma 
embodies the triple power of the Trimurti, though it passes unrecog- 
nized by the profane to this day. The allegory that makes Soma, the 
moon, produced by the churning of the Ocean of Life (Space) by the 
gods in another Manvantara (i. e,, in the ^r^genetic day of our plan- 
etary system), and that other allegory, which shows " the Rishis milking 
the earth, whose calf was Soma, the moon," has a deep cosmographical 
meaning ; for it is neither our earth which is milked, nor was the moon, 
which we know, the calf.*** Had our wise men of science known as 
much of the mysteries of nature as the ancient Aryans did, they would 
surely never have imagined that the moon was projected from the 
Earth. Once more, the oldest of permutations in theogony, the Son 
becoming his own father and the mother generated by the Son, has to 
be remembered and taken into consideration if the symbolical lan- 
guage of the ancients is to be understood by us. Otherwise mythoI<^y 
will be ever haunting the Orientalists as simply " the disease which 
springs up at a peculiar stage of human culture"! — as Renouf 
gravely observes in a Hibbert lecture. 

The ancients taught the, so to speak, au/o-generation of the Gods: 
the one divine essence, unmanifested, perpetually begetting a second- 
self, manifested, which second-self, androgynous in its nature, gives 
birth in an immaculate way to everything macro- and micro-cosmical 
in this universe. This was shown in the Circle and the Diameter, or 
the Sacred 10, a few pages back. 

But our Orientalists, their extreme desire to discover one homo- 
geneous element in nature notwithstanding, will not see it ; cramped in 
their researches by such ignorance, they — the Aryanists and Egyp- 
tologists — are constantly led astray from truth in their speculations. 
Thus, de Rouge is unable to understand, in the text which he trans- 

S52. The earth fleet for her life in the changes name. In one k is Mann Svftjaai- 
allegory, before Prithu, who pursues her. bhuva, in another Indra, in a third the Hion 



She assumes the shape of a cow, and, tremb* avat (Himalajas) itself, while Mem was tke 

ing with terror, runs awaj and hides even in milker. This is a deeper allegory than 

the regions of Brahmi. Therefore, it is not thinks, 
our Earth. Again, in erery Purina, the calf 



THE DIGNITY OF SAIS 399 

lates, the meaning of Ammon-ra saying to King Amenophes (supposed 
to be Meninon), " Thou art my Son, I have begotten thee " ; and as he 
finds the same idea in many a text and under various forms, this 
very Christian Orientalist is finally compelled to exclaim that " for 
this idea to have entered the mind of a hierogrammatist, there must 
have been in their religion a more or less defined doctrine, indicating 
as a possible fact that might come to pass, a divine and immaculate 
incarnation under a human form," Precisely. But why throw the 
explanation on an impossible prophecy, when the whole secret is ex- 
plained by the later religion copying the earlier? 

That doctrine was universal, and it was not the mind of any one 
hierogrammatist that evolved it ; for the Indian avatars are a proof to 
the contrary. After which, having come "to realize clearer"**' what 
" the Divine Father and Son " were with the Egyptians, de Rouge 
still fails to account for, and perceive what were the functions attrib- 
uted to the feminine principle in that primordial generation. He does 
not find it in the goddess Neith, of Sals. Yet he quotes the sentence of 
the Commander to Cambyses when introducing that king into the Saitic 
temple : " I made known to his Majesty the dignity of Sals, which is 
the abode of Neith, the great (female) producer, genetrix of the Sun, 
who is the first-bom, and who is not begotten, but only brought forth," 
and hence is the fruit of an immaculate mother. 

How much more grandiose, philosophical and poetical is the real 
distinction — for whoever is able to understand and appreciate it — 
made between the immaculate virgin of the ancient Pagans and the 
modem Papal conception. With the former, the ever-youthful mother 
nature, the antitype of her prototypes, the sun and moon, generates and 
brings forth her " mind-bom " son, the Universe. The Sun and Moon, 
as male- female deities, fmctify the earth, the microcosmical mother, 
and the latter conceives and brings forth, in her tum. With the 
Christians, " the first-bom " (primogenitus) is indeed generated, i. e,, 
begotten, "genitum, non factum," and positively conceived and brought 
forth — "Virgo pariet," explains the Latin Church. Thus, she drags 
down the noble spiritual ideal of the Virgin Mary to the earth, and, 
making her "of the earth, earthy," degrades that ideal to the lowest 
of the anthropomorphic goddesses of the rabble. 

Truly, Neith, Isis, Diana, etc., etc., were each of them "a demi- 
urgical goddess, at once visible and invisible, having her place in 
Heaven, and helping to the generation of species" — the moon, in short. 
Her occult aspects and powers are numberless, and, in one of them, 

553. His ehar realization of it is, that the etc; even to identifying Typhon with the 
Egyptians prophesied Jehovah (I) and his in- wicked dragon of the garden of Eden, and 
camated Redeemer (the good serpent), etc, this passes as serious and sober science. 



400 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

the moon becomes with the Egyptians Hathor, another aspect of Isis,*** 
and both of these goddesses are shown suckling Horus. Behold in the 
Egyptian Hall of the British Museum, Hathor worshiped by Pharaoh 
Thothmes, who stands between her and the Lord of Heavens. The 
monolith was taken from Kamak; and the same goddess has the fol- 
lowing legend inscribed on her throne : " The Divine Mother and 
Lady, or Queen o? Heaven " ; also " the Morning Star/' and the 
" Light op the Sea " (Stella matutina and Lux maris). All the lunar 
goddesses had a dual aspect — one divine, the other infernal. All were 
the virgin mothers of an immaculately born Son — the Sun. Raoul 
Rochette shows the moon-goddess of the Athenians — Pallas, or Cybele, 
Minerva, or again Diana — holding her child-son on the lap, invoked in 
her festivals as Movoycv^ 0cav, " the one Mother of God," sitting on a 
lion and surrounded by twelve personages ; in whom the Occultist re- 
cognizes the twelve great gods, and the pious Christian Orientalist the 
apostles, or rather the Grecian pagan prophecy thereof. 

They are both right, for the immaculate goddess of the Latin Church 
is a faithful copy of the older pagan goddesses; the number (twelve) 
of the apostles is that of the twelve tribes, and the latter are a per- 
sonification of the twelve great gods, and of the twelve signs of the 
Zodiac. Every detail almost in the Christian dogma is borrowed from 
the heathens. Semele, the wife of Jupiter and mother of Bacchus, the 
Sun, is, according to Nonnos, also "carried," or made to ascend to 
heaven after her death, where she presides between Mars and Venus, 
under the name of the Queen of the World, or the universe, vofi^SootXaa ; 
" at the names of which, as at the names of Hathor, Hekate, and other 
infernal goddesses," " tremble all the demons." **• 

" %€iUkri¥ rpifunnn Soiftove^." This Greek inscription on a small temple, 
reproduced on a stone that was found by somebody, and copied by 
Montfaucon, as de Mirville tells us,*'* informs us of the stupendous 
fact, that the Magna Mater of the old world was an impudent plagiar- 
ism, perpetrated by the Demon, of the Immaculate Virgin Mother of 
his Church. Whether so, or vice versa, is of no importance. That 
which is interesting to note is the perfect identity between the archaic 
COPY and the modern original. 

Did space permit we might show the inconceivable coolness and im- 
concern exhibited by certain followers of the Roman Catholic Church, 
when made to face the revelations of the Past To Maury's remark 
that " the Virgin took possession of all the Sanctuaries of Ceres and 

554. Hathor it tbe infernal lab, the god- confcMet the timiUrity, and lU ought to 
dcM pre-eminently of the West or the nether hncw. 

world. S56. Arch^hgie de Im Vierge Mir», 

555. This It Vt MirrUle. who proadly U3. 



ANTE-HISTORICAL CATHOLICISM 401 

Venus, and that the pagan rites, proclaimed and practised in honor of 
those goddesses, were in a good measure transferred to the mother of 
Christ," the advocate of Rome answers: — 

That such is the fact, and that it is just as it should be and quite natural As 
the dogma, the liturgy and the rites professed by the Roman Apostolic Church 
in 1862 are found engraved on monuments, inscribed on papyri, and cylinders 
hardly posterior to the Deluge, it does seem impossible to deny the existence of 
a ratsT ANTB-HisToucAt [Roman] CATHOuasu or which oub own is but the 
FAITHFUL CONTINUATION. . . . But while the former was the culmination, the 
summum of the impudence of demons and Goetic necromancy . . . the latter is 
divine. If in our [Christian] Revelation (f Apocalypse) , Mary, clothed with the 
Son and having the moon under her feet, has nothing more in common with the 
humble servant of Nasareth [sic], it is because she has now become the greatest 
of theological and cosmological powers in our universe."* 

Verily so, since Pindar's Hymns to Minerva^^ " who sits at the right 
hand of her Father Jupiter, and who is more powerful than all the 
other (angels or) gods," are likewise applied to the Virgin. It Is St 
Bernard, who, quoted by Cornelius a Lapide, is made to address the 

Virgin Mary in this wise : — 

** The Sun-Christ lives in thee and thou livest in him." "* 

Again the Virgin is admitted to be the moon by the same tmsophisti- 
cated holy man. Being the Lucina of the Church, that is in childbirth, 
the verse of Virgil •'•* — " Casta fave Lucina, tuus jam regnat Apollo " 
— is applied to her. "Like the moon, the Virgin is the Queen of 
Heaven," adds the innocent saint**'* 

This settles the question. The more similarity, according to such 
writers as De Mirville, there exists between the pagan conceptions and 
the Christian dogmas, the more divine appears the Christian religion, 
and the more is it seen to be the only truly inspired one, especially in 
its Roman Catholic form. The unbelieving scientists and the academi- 
cians who think they see in the Latin Church quite the opposite of 
divine inspiration, and who will not believe in the satanic tricks of 
plagiarism by anticipation, are severely taken to task. But then " they 
believe in nothing and reject even the Nabathean Agriculture as 
a romance and a pack of superstitious nonsense," complains the me- 
morialist. " In their perverted opinion Qu-ta-my's * idol of the moon ' 
and the statue of the Madonna are one!" A noble Marquis wrote 
twenty years ago six huge volumes, or, as he calls them, " Mhnoires 
to the French Academy," with the sole object of showing Roman Cath- 
olicism an inspired and revealed faith. As a proof thereof, he furnishes 

557. AreMolotU dt la Vierg€ Mkr€, 559. Sertnon on the Holy Virgin. 
pp. 116 and 119, and by the MarquU de 559a. Bel. IV, 10. 

MinrOlc. 560. Apoeal, ch. xil, Comm. by Complins 

558. Paie 19. a Lapidt, 



402 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

numberless facts, all tending to show that the entire ancient world, ever 
since the deluge, had been, with the help of the devil, systematically 
plagiarizing the rites, ceremonies, and dogmas of the future Holy 
Church to be bom ages later. What would that faithful son of Rome 
have said had he heard his co-religionist — M. Renouf, the distin- 
guished Egyptologist of the British Museum — declaring, in one of 
his learned lectures, that " neither Hebrews nor Greeks borrowed any 
of their ideas from Egypt " ? **^ 

But perhaps it is just this that M. Renouf intended to say — namely, 
that it is the Egyptians, the Greeks, and the Aryans, who borrowed 
theirs from the Latin Church? And if so, why, in the name of logic, 
do the Papists reject the additional information which the Occultists 
may give them on Moon- worship, since it all tends to show their (the 
Roman Catholic) worship as old as the world — OF Sabaeanism and 

ASTROLATRY ? 

The reason of early Christian and later Roman Catholic astrolatry, 
or the symbolical worship of Sun and Moon — identical with that of 
the Gnostics, though less philosophical and pure than the " Sun wor- 
ship " of the Zoroastrians — is a natural consequence of its birth and 
origin. The adoption by the Latin Church of such symbols as the water, 
fire, sun, moon and stars, and a good many other things, is simply a 
continuation by the early Christians of the old worship of Pagan na- 
tions. Thus Odin got his wisdom, power, and knowledge, by sitting 
at the feet of Mimir, the thrice-wise Jotun, who passed his life by the 
fountain of primeval Wisdom, the crystalline waters of which increased 
his knowledge daily. Mimir " drew the highest knowledge from the 
fountain, because the world was bom of water ; hence primeval wisdom 
was to be found in that mysterious element." *•* The eye which Odin 
had to pledge to acquire that knowledge may be " the Sun, which en- 
lightens and penetrates all things ; his other eye being the moon, whose 
reflection gazes out of the deep, and which at last, when setting, sinks 
into the Ocean." ••• But it is something more, besides this. Loki, the 
fire-god, is said to have hidden in the water, as well as in the moon, the 
light-giver, whose reflection he found therein ; and this belief that the 
fire finds refuge in the water was not limited to the old Scandinavians. 
It was shared by all nations and was finally taken up by the early 
Christians, who symbolized the Holy Ghost under the shape of Fire, 
cloven tongues like as fire " — the breath of the Father-SuN. This 
Fire " descends also into the Water or the Sea : Mar, Mary. The 
dove was the symbol of the Soul with several nations, it was sacred to 



u 



561. Qtioted in Mr. G. MaMey** Lee- 562. Asgard and tlu Gods, 86. 

ture«. 563. Ibid, 



IDENTITY OF TYPOLOGY 403 

Venus, the goddess bom from the sea-foam, and it became later the 
symbol of the Christian Anima Mundi, or the Holy Spirit. 

One of the most occult chapters in the " Book of the Dead " is ch. 
Ixxx, entitled : " To make the transformation into the god giving light 
to the path of Darkness," wherein "Woman-light of the Shadow" 
serves Thoth in his retreat in the moon. Thoth-Hermes is said to hide 
therein, because he is the representative of the Secret Wisdom. He 
is the manifested logos of its light side, the concealed deity or " Dark 
Wisdom" when he is supposed to retire to the opposite hemisphere. 
Speaking of her power, the moon calls herself repeatedly : " The Light 
which shineth in Darkness," the " Woman-Light" Hence it became 
the accepted symbol of all the Virgin-Mother goddesses. As the wicked 
*' evil " spirits warred against the moon in days of yore, so they are 
supposed to war now, without being able to prevail, however, against 
the actual Queen of Heaven, Mary, the moon. Hence also the moon 
was intimately connected in all the Pagan theogonies with the Dragon, 
her eternal enemy ; the Virgin, or Madonna, standing on the mythical 
Satan tmder that form, crushed and made powerless, under her feet 
This, because the head and tail of the Dragon, which represent in 
Eastern astronomy to this day the ascending and descending nodes of 
the moon, were also symbolized in ancient Greece by the two serpents. 
Hercules kills them on the day of his birth, and so does the babe in 
his virgin mother's arms. As Mr. Gerald Massey aptly observes in 
this connexion : 

All such symbols figured their own facts from the first, and did not pre- 
figure others of a totally different order. The Iconography (and dogmas, too) 
had survived in Rome from a period remotely pre-Christian. There xvas neither 
forgery nor interpolation of types; nothing but a continuity of imagery wiih 
a perversion of its meaning. 



§ X 
TREE, SERPENT, AND CROCODILE WORSHIP 

Object of horror or of adoration, men have for the 
serpent an implacable hatred, or prostrate themselves 
before its genius. Lie calls it. Prudence claims it. Envy 
carries it in its heart, and Eloquence on its caduceus. 
In hell it arms the whip of the Furies; in heaven 
Eternity makes of it its symbol. — De Chatsaubsiand 

The Ophites asserted that there were several kinds of genii, from 
god to man; that the relative superiority of these was ruled by the 
degree of light that was accorded to each; and they maintained that 



394. THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

In the introduction written by R'Hiz'qee-yah, which is very old, and forms 
part of the Brody edition of the Zohar (1, 56 sq,) is an account of a journey 
taken by R. Erazar, son of R. Shim-on b. lo'hai, and Rabbi Abbah. 

They met a man with a heavy burden and asked his name; but he 
refused to give it and proceeded to explain to them Thorah (Law). 

They asked : " Who caused thee thus to walk and carry such a heavy load ? " 
He answered: "The letter ">!* (Yod, which = 10, and is the symbolical letter of 
Kether and the essence and germ of the Holy name n\"l^ YHVH). . . . They 
said to him: " H thou wilt tell us the name of thy father, we will kiss the dust 
of thy feet." He replied: "As to my father, he had his dwelling in the Great 
Sea, and was a fish therein [like Vishnu and Dagon or Cannes], which [first] 
destroyed the great sea . . . and he was great and mighty and 'Ancient of 
Days,' until he swallowed all the other fishes in the (Great) Sea." ... R. 
El'azar listened and said to him: "Thou art the Son of the Holy Flame, thou 
art the Son of Rab Ham-'nttH-ah Sabah (the old) [the /irA in Aramaic or Chaldee 
is nun (noon)] thou art the Son of the Light of the Thorah," [Dharma] etc.*** 

Then the author explains that the feminine Sephiroth, Binah, is 
termed by the Kabalist the great sea: therefore Binah, whose divine 
names are Jehovah, Yah, and Elohim, is simply the Chaldaean Tiamat, 
the female power, the Thalatth of Berosus, who presides over the 
Chaos, and was made out later by Christian theology to be the serpent 
and the Devil. She-He (Yah-hovah) is the supernal (Heh, and Eve). 
This Yah-hovah then, or Jehovah, is identical with our Chaos — Father, 
Mother, Son — on the material plane and in the purely physical World. 
Daemon and Deus at one and the same time ; the sun and moon, good 
and evil, God and Demon. 

Lunar magnetism generates life, preserves and destroys it, psychic- 
ally as well as physically. And if, astronomically, she is one of the 
seven planets of the ancient world, in theogony she is one of the regents 
thereof ; with Christians now as much as with Pagans, the former re- 
ferring to her under the name of one of their archangels, and the 
latter imder that of one of their gods. 

Therefore the meanmg of the "fairy tale" translated by Chwolsohn 
from an old Chaldaean MS. translated into Arabic, about Qu-taray 
being instructed by the idol of the moon, is easily understood (tide 
Book III). Seldenus tells us the secret as well as Maimonides.**** 
The worshipers of the Teraphim (the Jewish Oracles) " carved images 
and claimed that the light of the principal stars (planets) permeating 
these through and through, the angelic Virtues (or the regents of the 
stars and planets) conversed with them, teaching them many most 
useful things and arts." And Seldenus explains that the Teraphim 
viert built and composed after the position of certain planets, those 

^44. Qabbalak, laMC Myer, p. S3S H ttq. 544 a. Mort NevoeMm, Book DI, ch. 



SOLAR-LUNAR WORSHIP IN THE CHURCH 395 

which the Greeks called orotxcta, and according to figures that were 
located in the sky and called dXc^i/r^ptoi, or the tutelary gods. Those 
who traced out the aroixda were called oroixctiofuiTtKot, or the diviners 

by the crrocxcta.*** 

It is such sentences, however, in the Nabathean Agriculture, that 
have f righfened the men of science and made them proclaim the work 
" either an apocrypha or a fairy tale, unworthy of the notice of an 
Academician." At the same time, as shown, zealous Roman Catholics 
and Protestants tore it metaphorically to pieces; the former because 
"if described the worship of demons," the latter because it is "ungodly." 
They are all wrong, once more. It is not a fairy tale; and as far as 
regards pious Churchmen, the same worship may be shown in the 
Scriptures, however disfigured by translation. Solar and Lunar wor- 
ship, as well as that of the Stars and Elements, are traced, and figure 
in the Christian theology ; defended by Papists, they are stoutly denied 
by the Protestants only at their own risk and peril. Two instances 
may be given. 

Ammianus Marcellinus teaches that ancient divinations were always 
accomplished with the help of the Spirits of the Elements, " Spiritus 
elementorum," and in Greek trvevt^ra twv otoixciW.*** 

But it is found now that the planets, the Elements, and the Zodiac, 
were figured not only in Heliopolis by the twelve stones called " the 
mysteries of the elements," element orum arcana, but also in Solomon's 
temple, and, as pointed out by various writers, in several old Italian 
churches and even at Notre Dante de Paris, where they can be seen to 
this day. 

No symbol — the sun included — was more complex in its manifold 
meanings than the lunar symbol. The sex was, of course, dual. With 
some it was male, e, g., the Hindu " King Soma," and the Chal- 
daean 5*111; with other nations it was female, the beauteous goddesses 
Diana-Luna, Ilithyiti, Lucina. In Tauris, human victims were sacri- 
ficed to Artemis, a form of the lunar goddess ; the Cretans called her 
Diktynna, and the Medes and Persians Anaitis, as shown by an inscrip- 
tion of Koloe: •AprcfuSi •Avoem. But, we are now concerned chiefly 
with the most chaste and pure of the virgin goddesses, Luna-Artemis, 
to whom Pamphos was the first to give the surname of KaAA/ony, and of 
whom Hippolytos wrote KaAAtony woAv wapOivtay^*'' This Artemis- 
Lochia, the goddess that presided at conception and childbirth (Iliad, 
Pausanias, etc., etc.), is, in her functions and as the triple Hekate, the 
Orphic deity, the predecessor of the god of the Rabbins and pre- 
Christian Kabalists, and his lunar type. The goddess Tpifu>^<^ was 

54S. De Diis Syriis, Tcriph.. II. Synt p. 31. Vide infra, the Teraphim, 
S46. XXI, 1. 547. See Pausanias, yui, 35, 8. 



406 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

Stage. If told that this mode of procreation, which the whole world of 
being has now in common on this earth, is but a passing phase, a phys- 
ical means of furnishing the conditions to, and producing the pheno- 
mena of life which will alter with this, and disappear with the next 
Root-Race — they would laugh at such a superstitious and unscientific 
idea. But the most learned Occultists assert this because they know it. 
The universe of living beings, of all those which procreate their species, 
is the living witness to the various modes of procreation in the evolution 
of animal and human species and races; and the naturalist ought to 
sense this truth intuitionally, even though he is yet tmable to demon- 
strate it And how could he, indeed, with the present modes of thought ! 
The landmarks of the archaic history of the past are few and scarce, 
and those that men of science come across are mistaken for finger-posts 
of our little era. Even so-called "universal" (?) history embraces 
but a tiny field in the almost botmdless space of the unexplored r^ons 
of our* latest, fifth Root-Race. Hence, every fresh sign-post, every 
new glyph of the hoary past that is discovered, is added to the old stock 
of information, to be interpreted on the same lines of pre-existing con- 
ceptions, and without any reference to the special cycle of thought 
which that particular glyph may belong to. How can Truth ever come 
to light if this method is never changed I 

Thus, in the beginning of their joint existence as a glyph of Immortal 
Being, the Tree and Serpent were divine imagery, truly. The tree was 
reversed, and its roots were generated in Heaven and grew out of the 
Rootless Root of all-being. Its tnmk grew and developed, crossing the 
planes of Pleroma, it shot out crossways its luxuriant branches, first (m 
the plane of hardly differentiated matter, and then downward till they 
touched the terrestrial plane. Thus, the Asvattha, tree of Life and 
Being, whose destruction alone leads to immortality, is said in the 
Bhagavadgitd to grow with its roots above and its branches below.**^ 
The roots represent the Supreme Being, or First Cause, the Locos; 
but one has to go beyond these roots to unite oneself with Krishna, 
who, says Arjuna,*** is "greater than Brahman, and First Cause . . . 
the indestructible, that which is, that which is not, and what is be]rond 
them." Its boughs are Hiran3ragarbha (Brahma or Brahman in his 
highest manifestations, say Sridhara and Madhusiidana) , the highest 
Dhyan Chohans or Devas. The Vedas are its leaves. He only who 
goes beyond the roots shall never return, i. e., shall reincarnate no more 
during this " age " of Brahma, 

It is only when its pure boughs had touched the terrestrial mud of 
the garden of Eden, of our Adamic race, that this Tree got soiled by 
the contact and lost its pristine purity ; and that the Serpent of Eternity 

567. Chtptef XT. 568. ChMpta id. 



THE SEVEN-HEADED DRAGONS 407 

— the heaven-bom Locos — was finally degraded. In days of old 

— of the divine Dynasties on Earth — the now dreaded Reptile was 
r^;arded as the first beam of light that radiated from the abyss of 
divine Mystery. Various were the forms which it was made to assume, 
and numerous the natural symbols adapted to it, as it crossed aeons of 
Time : as from Infinite Time itself — Kdla — it fell into the space and 
time evolved out of human speculation. These forms were Cosmic 
and astronomical, theistic and pantheistic, abstract and concrete. They 
became in turn the Polar Dragon and the Southern Cross, the Alpha 
Draconis of the Pjrramid, and the Hindu-Buddhist Dragon, which 
ever threatens, yet never swallows the Sun during its eclipses. Till 
then, the Tree remained ever green, for it was sprinkled by the 
waters of life; the great Dragon, ever divine, so long as it was kept 
within the precincts of the sidereal fields. But the tree grew and its 
lower boughs touched at last the infernal regions — our Earth. Then 
the great serpent Nidhogg — he who devours the corpses of the evil- 
doers in the "Hall of Misery" (human life), so soon as they are 
plunged into " Hwergelmir," the roaring caldron (of human passions) 

— gnawed the World-tree. The worms of materiality covered the once 
healthy and mighty roots, and are now ascending higher and higher 
along the trunk ; while the Midgard-snake coiled at the bottom of the 
Seas, encircles the Earth, and, through its venomous breath, makes her 
powerless to defend herself. 

They are all seven-headed, the dragons and serpents of antiquity — 
" one head for each race, and every head with seven hairs on it," as 
the all^ory has it Aye, from Ananta, the Serpent of Eternity which 
carries Vishnu through the Manvantara, from the original primordial 
Sesha, whose seven heads become "one thousand heads" in the Puranic 
fancy, down to the seven-headed Akkadian Serpent. This typifies the 
Seven principles throughout nature and man; the highest or middle 
head being the seventh. It is not of the Mosaic, Jewish Sabbath that 
Philo speaks in his Creation of the World, when saying that the world 
was completed " according to the perfect nature of number 6." ••• For, 
" when that reason [nous'\ which is holy in accordance with the number 
seven has entered the soul [rather the living body], the nimiber six is 
thus arrested, and all the mortal things which that number makes." •••* 
And again : " Number 7 is the festival day of all the earth, the birthday 
of the world. I know not whether any one would be able to celebrate 
the number 7 in adequate terms." *••* . . . The author of The Natural 
Genesis thinks that "the Septenary of Stars seen in the great bear 
[the Saptarshis] and seven-headed Dragon furnished a visible origin 



569. SOL 569a. On tk^ AUggprUs of the Scered Laws, rl 

569h. On the Crtaiion of thg World, 



406 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

for the symbolic seven of time above. The goddess of the seven stars," 

he adds : — 

Was the mother of time, as Kep; whence Kepti and Sebti for the two times 
and number seven. So this is the star of the Seven by name. Sevekh (Kronus), 
the Son of the goddess, has the name of the seven or seventh. So has Sefekh 
Abu who builds the house on high, as Wisdom (Sophia) built hers with seven 
pillars. . . . The primary Kronotypes were seven, and thus the beginning of 
time in heaven is based on the number and the name of seven, on account of 
the starry demonstrators. The seven stars as they turned round annually kept 
pointing, as it were, with the forefinger of the right hand, and describing a circle 
in the upper and lower heaven."* The number seven naturally suggested a meas- 
ure by seven, that led to what may be termed Sevemng, and to the marking and 
mapping out of the circle in seven corresponding divisions which were assigned 
to the seven great constellations; and thus was formed the celestial heptanomis 
of Egypt in the heavens. . . . When the stellar heptanomis was broken up and 
divided into four quarters, it was multiplied by four, and the twenty-eight signs 
took the place of the primary seven constellations, the lunar zodiac of twenty- 
eight days being the registered result"* ... In the Chinese arrangement the 
four sevens are given to four genii that preside over the four cardinal points. 
. . . [In Chinese Buddhism and Esoteridsm the genii are represented by four 
Dragons — the " Maharajas" of the Stanzas.] The seven northern constellations 
make up the Black Warrior; the seven Eastern (Chinese autumn) constitute 
the White Tiger; the seven Southern are the Vermilion Bird; and the seven 
Western (called Vernal) are the Azure Dragon. Each of these four Spirits 
presides over its heptanomis during one lunar week. The genitrix of the first 
heptanomis (Typhon of the Seven Stars) now took a lunar character; ... in 
this phase we find the goddess Sefekh, whose name signifies number 7, b the 
feminine word, or logos in place of the mother of Time, who was the earlier 
Word, as goddess of the Seven Stars."*" 

The author shows that it was the goddess of the Great Bear and 
mother of Time who was in Egypt from the earliest times the " Living 
Word," and that 

Sevekh-Kronus, whose type was the Crocodile-Dragon, the pre-planetary form 
of Saturn, was called her son and consort; he was her Word-Logos."* 

The above is quite plain, but it was not the knowledge of astronomy 
only that led the ancients to the process of Sevening. The primal cause 
goes far deeper and will be explained in its place. 

The above quotations are no digressions. They are brought forward 
as showing (a) the reason why a full Initiate was called a " Dragon," a 
" Snake," a " Naga " ; and (&) that our septenary division was used by 

570. For the Mine reMon the diTitton oldetft and preceded the four-fold di i irim i, 
of the |»rindplet in man fciU teren it It it the root of archaic clateification. 
thui reckoned, at they describe the tane 572. *' Typology of Time,** VoL n, pk. 
circle in the Iraman hifjier and lower natnrc 313, Noturai Gen^tit. 

571, That the teptenary diritioo it the 573. Ihtd., paft 321, VoL L 



DRAGON AND CROCODILE ^^ 

the priests of the earliest dynasties in Egypt, for the same reason and 
on the same basis as by us. This needs further elucidation, however. 
As already stated, that which Mr. G. Massey calls the four genii of the 
four cardhial points ; and the Chinese, the Black Warrior, White Tiger, 
Vermilion Bird, and Azure Dragon, is called in the Secret Books, — 
the " Four Hidden Dragons of Wisdom " and the " Celestial Nagas." 
Now, as shown, the seven-headed or septenary Dragon-Logos had been 
in course of time split up, so to speak, into four heptanomic parts or 
twenty-eight portions. Each lunar week has a distinct occult character 
in the lunar month ; each day of the twenty-eight has its special char- 
acteristics; as each of the twelve constellations, whether separately 
or in combination with other signs, has an occult influence either for 
good or for evil. This represents the sum of knowledge that men can 
acquire on this earth ; yet few are those who acquire it, an^ still fewer 
are the wise men who get to the root of knowledge symbolized by the 
great Root Dragon, the spiritual ixxx)S of these visible signs. But those 
who do, receive the name of " Dragons," and they are the "Arhats of 
the Four Truths of the 28 Faculties," or attributes, and have always 
been so called. 

The Alexandrian Neo-Platonists asserted that to become real Chal- 
dees or Magi, one had to master the science or knowledge of the periods 
of the Seven Rectors of the world, in whom is all wisdom. In Pro- 
dus " In Timaeum*' bk. 1, lamblichos is credited with another version, 
which does not, however, alter the meaning. He says .that " the Ass)rr- 
ians have not only preserved the records of seven and twenty myriads 
of years, as Hipparchos says they have, but likewise of the whole 
apocatastases and periods of the Seven Rulers of the World." The 
legends of every nation and tribe, whether civilized or savage, point 
to the once universal belief in the great wisdom and cunning of the 
Serpents. They are " charmers." They hypnotize the bird with their 
eye, and man himself, very often, does not feel above their fascinating 
influence ; therefore the symbrf is a most fitting one. 

The crocodile is the Egyptian dragon. It was the dual symbol of 
Heaven and Earth, of Sun and Moon, and was made sacred, in conse- 
quence of its amphibious nature, to Osiris and Isis. According to Euse- 
bius, the Egyptians represented the sun in a ship as its pilot, this ship 
being carried along by a crocodile " to show the motion of the Sun in 
the moyst (Space)." '^^ The crocodile was moreover, the sjrmbol of 
Egypt herself — the lower, as being the more swampy of the two coun- 
tries. The Alchemists claim another interpretation. They say that the 
symbol of the sun in the ship on the Ether of Space meant that the 
hermetic matter is the principle, or basis, of gold, or again the phUo- 

S74. PreptraHo BvamftUca, III, zi. 



410 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

sophical sun; the water, within which the crocodile is swimming, is 
that water or matter made liquid ; the ship herself, finally, representing 
the vessel of nature, in which the sun, or the sulphuric, igneous prin- 
ciple, acts as a pilot: because it is the sun which conducts the work 
by his action upon the moist or mercury. The above is only for the 
Alchemists. 

The Serpent became the type and symbol of evil, and of the Devil, 
only during the middle ages. The early Christians — besides the Ophite 
Gnostics — had their dual Logos : the Good and the Bad Serpent, the 
Agathodaimon and the Kakodaimon. This is demonstrated by the 
writings of Markos, Valentinus, and many others, and especially in 
Pistis Sophia — certainly a docimient of the earliest centuries of Christ- 
ianity. On the marble sarcophagus of a tomb, discovered in 1852 
near the Porta Pia, one sees the scene of the adoration of the Magi, 
" or else," remarks the late C. W. King in " The Gnostics," " the proto- 
type of that scene, the ' Birth of the New Sun.' " The mosaic floor 
exhibited a curious design which might have represented either (a) 
Isis suckling the babe Harpokrates, or (b) the Madonna nursing the 
infant Jesus. In the smaller sarcophagi that surrounded the larger one, 
eleven leaden plates rolled like scrolls were found, three of which have 
been deciphered. The contents of these ought to be regarded as final 
proof of a much-vexed question, for they show that either the early 
Christians, up to the Vlth Century, were bona fide pagans, or that 
dogmatic Christianity was borrowed wholesale, and passed in full 
into the Christian Church — Sun, Tree, Serpent, Crocodile and all. 

On the first is seen Anubis . . . holding out a scroll; at his feet are two 
female busts; below all are two serpents entwined ... a corpse swathed up 
like a mummy. In the second scroll ... is Anubis, holding out a cross, the 
** Sign of Life." Under his feet lies the corpse encircled in the numerous folds 
of a huge serpent, the Agathodaemon, guardian of the deceased. ... In the 
third scroll, Anubis bears on his arm . . . the outline of ... a complete 
Latin cross. ... At the god's foot is a rhomboid, the Egyptian "Egg of the 
World," towards which crawls a serpent coiled into a circle, . . . Under the 
busts is the letter «d repeated seven times in a line, reminding one of the ** names.** 
. . . Very remarkable also is the line of characters, apparently Palmyrene, upon 
the legs of the first Anubis. As for the figure of the serpent, supposing these 
talismans to emanate not from the Isiac but the newer Ophite creed, it may 
well stand for that "True and perfect Serpent," who leads forth the souls of 
all that put their trust in him out of the Egypt of the body, and through the 
Red Sea of Death into the Land of Promise, saving them on their way from 
the Serpents of the Wilderness, that is, from the Rulers of the Stars."" 

And this " True and Perfect Serpent " is the seven-lettered God who 
is now credited with being Jehovah, and Jesus One with him. To this 

575. Kinc't TA# GncsHes attd their Remamt, p. S66. 



THE MYSTERY OF THE SEVEN THUNDERS ^^ 

Seven-vowelled god the candidate for initiation is sent by Christos, in 
the Pistis Sophia, a work earlier than St John's Revelation, and evi- 
dently of the same school. "The [Serpent of the] Seven Thunders 
uttered these seven vowels," but " Seal up those things which the seven 
thunders uttered, and write them not," says Revelation. " Do ye seek 
after these mysteries? " inquires Jesus in Pistis Sophia, " No mystery 
is more excellent than they [the seven vowels] : for they shall bring 
your souls unto the Light of Lights " — i, e,, true Wisdom. " Nothing, 
therefore, is more excellent than the mysteries which ye seek after, 
saving only the mystery of the Seven Vowels and their Forty and 
NINE Powers, and the numbers thereof." 

In India, it was the mystery of the Seven Fires and their forty-nine 
fires or aspects, or " the members thereof," just the same. 

These seven vowels are represented by the Svastika signs on the 
crowns of the seven heads of the Serpent of Eternity, in India, among 
esoteric Buddhists, in Eg)rpt, in Chaldaea, etc., etc., and among the 
Initiates of every other coimtry. It is on the Seven zones of post 
mortem ascent, in the Hermetic writings, that the " mortal " leaves, on 
each, one of his " Souls " (or Principles) ; until arrived on the plane 
above all zones he remains as the great Formless Serpent of absolute 
wisdom — or the Deity itself. The seven-headed serpent has more than 
one signification in the Arcane teachings. It is the seven-headed Draco, 
each of whose heads is a star of the Lesser Bear ; but it was also, and 
pre-eminently, the Serpent of Darkness (*. e., inconceivable and incom- 
prehensible) whose seven heads were the seven Logoi, the reflections 
of the one and first manifested Light — the universal Logos. 



§ XI 

DAEMON EST DEUS INVERSUS 

This symbolical sentence, in its many-sided forms, is certainly most 
dangerous and iconoclastic in the face of all the dualistic later religions 
— or rather theologies — and especially so in the light of Christianity. 
Yet it is neither just nor correct to say that it is Christianity which 
has conceived and brought forth Satan. As an "adversary," the 
opposing Power required by the equilibrium and harmony of things 
in Nature — like Shadow to throw off still brighter the Light, like 
Night to bring into greater relief the Day, and like cold to make one 
appreciate the more the comfort of heat — Satan has ever existed. 
Homogeneity is one and indivisible. But if the homogeneous One and 
Absolute is no mere figure of speech, and if heterogeneity in its dual- 
istic aspect, is its offspring — its bif urcous shadow or reflection — then 



402 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

numberless facts, all tending to show that the entire ancient world, ever 
since the deluge, had been, with the help of the devil, systematically 
plagiarizing the rites, ceremonies, and dogmas of the future Holy 
Church to be bom ages later. What would that faithful son of Rome 
have said had he heard his co-religionist — M. Renouf, the distin- 
guished Eg)rptologist of the British Museum — declaring, in one of 
his learned lectures, that " neither Hebrews nor Greeks borrowed any 
of their ideas from Egypt " ? "'^ 

But perhaps it is just this that M. Renouf intended to say — namely, 
that it is the Egyptians, the Greeks, and the Aryans, who borrowed 
theirs from the Latin Church? And if so, why, in the name of l<^c, 
do the Papists reject the additional information which the Occultists 
may give them on Moon- worship, since it all tends to show their (the 
Roman Catholic) worship as old as the world — OF Sabaeanism and 

ASTROLATRY ? 

The reason of early Christian and later Roman Catholic astrolatry, 
or the symbolical worship of Sun and Moon — identical with that of 
the Gnostics, though less philosophical and pure than the " Sun wor- 
ship " of the Zoroastrians — is a natural consequence of its birth and 
origin. The adoption by the Latin Church of such symbols as the water, 
fire, sun, moon and stars, and a good many other things, is simply a 
continuation by the early Christians of the old worship of Pagan na- 
tions. Thus Odin got his wisdom, power, and knowledge, by sitting 
at the feet of Mimir, the thrice-wise Jotun, who passed his life by the 
fountain of primeval Wisdom, the crystalline waters of which increased 
his knowledge daily. Mimir " drew the highest knowledge from the 
fountain, because the world was bom of water ; hence primeval wisdom 
was to be found in that mysterious element." "•' The eye which Odin 
had to pledge to acquire that knowledge may be " the Sun, which en- 
lightens and penetrates all things ; his other eye being the moon, whose 
reflection gazes out of the deep, and which at last, when setting, sinks 
into the Ocean." '^•^ But it is something more, besides this. Loki, the 
fire-god, is said to have hidden in the water, as well as in the moon, the 
light-giver, whose reflection he found therein ; and this belief that the 
fire finds refuge in the water was not limited to the old Scandinavians. 
It was shared by all nations and was finally taken up by the early 
Christians, who symbolized the Holy Ghost under the shape of Fire, 
" cloven tongues like as fire " — the breath of the Father-SuN. This 
" Fire " descends also into the Water or the Sea : Mar, Mary, The 
dove was the symbol of the Soul with several nations, it was sacred to 

561. Quoted in Mr. G. Maney't Uc- 562. Asgard and tfu Gods, 86. 

tttTM. 563. Ibid, 



IDENTITY OF TYPOWGY 403 

Venus, the goddess bom from the sea-foam, and it became later the 
symbol of the Christian Anitna Mundi, or the Holy Spirit. 

One of the most occult chapters in the " Book of the Dead *' is ch. 
Ixxx, entitled : " To make the transformation into the god giving light 
to the path of Darkness," wherein "Woman-light of the Shadow" 
serves Thoth in his retreat in the moon. Thoth-Hermes is said to hide 
therein, because he is the representative of the Secret Wisdom. He 
is the manifested logos of its light side, the concealed deity or " Dark 
Wisdom" when he is supposed to retire to the opposite hemisphere. 
Speaking of her power, the moon calls herself repeatedly : " The Light 
which shineth in Darkness," the " Woman-Light." Hence it became 
the accepted symbol of all the Virgin-Mother goddesses. As the wicked 
" evil " spirits warred against the moon in days of yore, so they are 
supposed to war now, without being able to prevail, however, against 
the actual Queen of Heaven, Mary, the moon. Hence also the moon 
was intimately connected in all the Pagan theogonies with the Dragon, 
her eternal enemy ; the Virgin, or Madonna, standing on the m)rthical 
Satan under that form, crushed and made powerless, under her feet. 
This, because the head and tail of the Dragon, which represent in 
Eastern astronomy to this day the ascending and descending nodes of 
the moon, were also symbolized in ancient Greece by the two serpents. 
Hercules kills them on the day of his birth, and so does the babe in 
his virgin mother's arms. As Mr. Gerald Massey aptly observes in 
this connexion : 

All such symbols figured their own facts from the first, and did not pre- 
figure others of a totally different order. The Iconography (and dogmas, too) 
bad survived in Rome from a period remotely pre-Christian. There was neither 
forgery nor interpolation of types; nothing but a continuity of imagery with 
a perversion of its meaning. 



§ X 
TREE, SERPENT, AND CROCODILE WORSHIP 

Object of horror or of adoration, men have for the 
serpent an implacable hatred, or prostrate themselves 
before its genius. Lie calls it, Prudence claims it, Envy 
carries it in its heart, and Eloquence on its caduceus. 
In hell it arms the whip of the Furies; in heaven 
Eternity makes of it its symbol.— De Chatraubwand 

The Ophites asserted that there were several kinds of genii, from 
god to man; that the relative superiority of these was ruled by the 
degree of light that was accorded to each; and they maintained that 



414 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

who would become an automaton without the exercise of his free will 
and aspirations after that sunlight, which would lose its being and value 
for him had he nothing but light. Good is infinite and eternal only in the 
eternally concealed from us, and this is why we imagine it eternal. On 
the manifested planes, one equilibrates the other. Few are those theists 
and believers in a personal God, who do not make of Satan the shadow 
of God; or who, confounding both, do not believe they have a right 
to pray to that idol asking its help and protection for the exercise 
and impunity of their evil and cruel deeds. " Lead us not into Tempta- 
tion " is addressed daily to " our Father, which art in Heaven," and not 
to the Devil, by millions of human Christian hearts. They do so, repeat- 
ing the very words put in the mouth of their Savior, and do not give 
one thought to the fact that their meaning is contradicted point blank 
by James " the brother of the Lord." " Let no man say when he is 
tempted, I am tempted of God : for God cannot be tempted with evil, 
neither tempteth he any man." "^* Why, then, say that it is the Devil 
who tempts us, when the Church teaches us on the authority of Christ 
that it is God who does so ? Open any pious volume in which the word 
" temptation " is defined in its theological sense, and forthwith you find 
two definitions: (1) " Those afflictions and troubles whereby God tries 
his people "; (2) Those means and enticements which the Devil makes 
use of to ensnare and allure mankind."*" If accepted literally, the two 
teachings of Christ and James contradict each other, and what dogma 
can reconcile the two if the occult meaning is rejected? 

Between the alternative allurements, wise will be that philosopher 
who will be able to decide where God disappears to make room for the 
Devil ! Therefore when we read that " the Devil is a liar and the 
father of it," f. e., incarnate lie, and are told in the same breath 
that Satan — the Devil — was a son of God and the most beautiful of 
his archangels, rather than believe that Father and Son are a gigantic, 
personified and eternal hit, we prefer to turn to Pantheism and to 
Pagan philosophy for information. 

Once that the key to Genesis is in our hands, it is the scientific and 
S3anbolical Kabala which unveils the secret. The great Serpent of 
the Garden of Eden and the " Lord God " are identical, and so are 
Jehovah and Cain one — that Cain who is referred to in theology as 
the " murderer " and the liar to God ! Jehovah tempts the King of 
Israel to number the people, and Satan tempts him to do the same in 
another place. Jehovah turns into the fiery serpents to bite those he is 
displeased with; and Jehovah informs the brazen serpent that heals 
them. 

These short, and seemingly contradictory, statements in the Old 

579. Thg Gen, Bp, of James, i. 13. 580. St James i 2, 12; and MatU ▼{. IX 



THEOLOGICAI, ETYMOLOGIES ^^^ 

Testament (contradictory because the two Powers are separated instead 
of being regarded as the two faces of one and the same thing) are the 
echoes — distorted out of recognition by exotericism and theology — of 
the universal and philosophical dogmas in nature, so well understood 
by the primitive Sages. We find the same groundwork in several per- 
sonifications in the Puranas, only far more ample and philosophically 
suggestive. 

Thus Pulastya, a " Son of God " — one of the first progeny — is 
made the progenitor of Demons, the Rakshasas, the tempters and the 
Dcvourers of men. Piiachi (female Demon) is a daughter of Daksha, 
a " Son of God " too, and a God, and the mother of all the Pisachas."** 
The Demons, so called in the Puranas, are very extraordinary devils 
when judged from the standpoint of European and orthodox views 
about these creatures, since all of them — Danavas, Daityas, Pisachas, 
and the Rakshasas — are represented as extremely pious, following the 
precepts of the Vedas, some of them even being great Yogis. But they 
oppose the clergy and Ritualism, sacrifices and forms — just what the 
full-blown Yogins do to this day in India — and are no less respected 
for it, though they are allowed to follow neither caste nor ritual ; hence 
all those Puranic giants and Titans are called Devils. The Mission- 
aries, ever on the watch to show, if they can, the Hindu traditions no 
better than a reflection of the Jewish Bible, have evolved a whole rom- 
ance on the allied identity of Pulast3ra with Cain, and of the Rak- 
shasas with the Cainites, "the accursed," the cause of the Noachian 
Deluge. (See the work of Abbe Gorresio, who "etymologizes" Pul- 
astya's name as meaning the "rejected," hence Cain, if you please). 
Pulastya dwells in Kedara, he says, which means a " dug-up place," a 
mine, and Cain is shown in tradition and the Bible as the first worker 
in metals and a miner thereof ! 

While it is very probable that the Gibboritn (the giants) of the Bible 
are the Rakshasas of the Hindus, it is still more certain that both are 
Atlanteans, and belong to the submerged races. However it may be, 
no Satan could be more persistent in slandering his enemy, or more 
spiteful in his hatred, than the Christian theologians are in cursing him 
as the father of every evil. Compare their vituperations and opinions 
given about the Devil with the philosophical views of the Puranic sages 
and their Christ-like mansuetude. When Parasara, whose father was 
devoured by a Rakshasa, was preparing himself to destroy (magically) 
the whole race, his grandsire, Vasishtha, says a few extremely suggest- 
ive words to him. He shows the irate sage, on his own confession, 
that there is Evil and Karma, but no " evil spirits." He says : 

Let thy wrath be appeased. The Rakshasas are not culpable; thy father's 

581. Padma Purina, 



416 THE SECMT DOCTRINE 

death was the work of Karma. Anger is the passion of fools; it becometh not 
a wise man. By whom, it may be asked, is any one killed f Every man reaps 
the consequences of his own acts. Anger, my son, is the destruction of all that 
man obtains . . . and prevents the attainment of emancipation. The sages shun 
wrath. Be not thou, my child, subject to its influence. Let not those una fending 
spirits of darkness be consumed; let thy sacrifice cease. Mercy is the might of 
the righteous."* 

Thus, every such " sacrifice " or prayer to God for help is no better 
than an act of black magic. That which Para^ra prayed for, was the 
destruction of the Spirits of Darkness, for his personal revenge. He 
is called a Pagan, and the Christians have doomed him as such, to 
eternal hell. Yet, in what respect is the prayer of sovereigns and 
generals, who pray before every battle for the destruction of their 
enemy, any better? Such a prayer is in every case black magic of the 
worst kind, concealed like a demon " Mr. Hyde " imder a sanctimonious 
" Dr. Jekyll." 

In human nature, evil denotes only the polarity of matter and Spirit, 
a struggle for life between the two manifested Principles in Space and 
Time, which principles are one per se, inasmuch as they are rooted in 
the Absolute. In Kosmos, the equilibrium must be preserved. The 
operations of the two contraries produce harmony, like the centri- 
petal and centrifugal forces, which are necessary to each other — 
mutually inter-dependent — " in order that both should live." If one 
is arrested, the action of the other will become immediately self- 
destructive. 

Since the personification called Satan has been amply analysed from 
its triple aspect — in the Old Testament, Christian theology and the an- 
cient Gentile attitude of thought — those who would learn more of it arc 
referred to Vol. II of Isis Unveiled, chap, x.*** The present subject is 
touched upon and fresh explanations attempted for a very good reason. 
Before we can approach the evolution of physical and divine man, 
we have first to master the idea of cyclic evolution, to acquaint our- 
selves with the philosophies and beliefs of the four races which pre- 
ceded our present race, to learn what were the ideas of those Titans 
and giants — giants, verily, mentally as well as physically. The whole 
of antiquity was imbued with that philosophy which teaches the involu- 
tion of spirit into matter, the progressive, downward cyclic descent, 
or active, self-conscious evolution. The Alexandrian Gnostics have 
sufficiently divulged the secret of initiations, and their records are 
full of " the sliding down of Aeons " in their double qualification of 
Angelic Beings and Periods: the one the natural evolution of the 

582. Vishnu Purina, Book I. ch. i 
583. See mlto teircral sections in Book II, Part II of this work. 



THE ANGELS SLANDERED 417 

Other. On the other hand, Oriental traditions on both sides of the 
" black water " — the oceans that separate the two Basts — are as full 
of allegories about the downfall of Pleroma, of that of the gods and 
Devas. One and all, they allegorized and explained the Fall as the 
desire to learn and acquire knowledge — to know. This is the natural 
sequence of mental evolution, the spiritual becoming transmuted into 
the material or physical. The same law of descent into materiality 
and re-ascent into spirituality asserted itself during the Christian era, 
the reaction having stopped only just now, in our own special sub-race. 

That which, perhaps ten millenniums ago, was allegorized in Pyman- 
der in a triune character of interpretation, meant as a record of an 
astronomical, anthropological, and even alchemical fact, namely, the 
allegory of the seven rectors breaking through the seven circles of fire, 
was dwarfed into one material and anthropomorphic interpretation — 
the rebellion and Fall of the Angels, The multivocal, profoundly philo- 
sophical narrative, under its poetical form of the " Marriage of Heaven 
with Earth," the love of nature for Divine form and the " Heavenly 
man," enraptured with his own beauty mirrored in nature — f. e,. Spirit 
attracted into matter — has now become, under theological handling: 
"the seven Rectors disobeying Jehovah, self admiration generating 
Satanic Pride, followed by their Fall, Jehovah permitting no worship 
to be lost save upon himself." In short, the beautiful Planet-Angels, the 
glorious cyclic aeons of the ancients, became henceforward synthesized 
in their most orthodox shape in Samael, the chief of the Demons in the 
Talmud, " That great serpent with twelve wings that draws down after 
himself, in his Fall, the solar system, or the Titans." But Schemal, 
the alter ego and the Sabean type of Samael, meant, in his philosophical 
and esoteric aspect, the " year " in its astrological evil aspect, its twelve 
months or wings of unavoidable evils, in nature ; and in esoteric theo- 
gony,*** both Schemal and Samael represented a particular divinity. 
With the Kabalists they are "the Spirit of the Earth," the personal 
god that governs it, identical de facto with Jehovah. For the Talmud- 
ists admit themselves that Samael is a god-name of one of the seven 
Elohim. The Kabalists, moreover, show the two, Schemal and Samael, 
as a symbolical form of Saturn, Chronos, the twelve wings standing 
for the 12 months, and the symbol in its collectivity representing a 
racial cycle. Jehovah and Saturn are also glyphically identical. 

This leads in its turn to a very curious deduction from a Roman 
Catholic dogma. Many renowned writers belonging to the Latin Church 
admit that a difference exists, and should be made, between the Uranian 
Titans, the antediluvian giants (also Titans), and those post-diluvian 
giants in whom they (the Roman Catholics) zvill see the descendants of 

584. See Chwoltobn in Nabathsan AcRicuLTUBg, VoL II, p. 217. 



418 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

the mythical Ham. In clearer words, there is a difference to be made 
between the Cosmic, primordial opposing Forces — guided by cyclic 
law — the Atlantean human giants, and the post-diluvian great adepts, 
whether of the right or the left hand. At the same time they show that 
Michael, " the generalissimo of the fighting Celestial Host, the body^ 
guard of Jehovah/' as it would seem (see de Mirville) is also a Titan, 
only with the adjective of " divine " before the cognomen. Thus those 
" Uranides " who are called everywhere " divine Titans," and who, 
having rebelled against Kronos (Saturn), are therefore also shown to 
be the enemies of Samael (an Elohim, also, and synonymous with Je- 
hovah in his collectivity), are identical with Michael and his host In 
short, the roles are reversed, all the combatants are confused, and no 
student is able to distinguish clearly which is which. Esoteric explana- 
tion may, however, bring some order into this confusion, in which 
Jehovah becomes Saturn, and Michael and his army, Satan and the 
rebellious angels, owing to the indiscreet endeavors of the too faithful 
zealots to see in every pagan god a devil. The true meaning is far 
more philosophical, and the legend of the first " Fall " (of the angels) 
assumes a scientific coloring when correctly understood. 

Kronos stands for endless (hence immovable) Duration, without 
beginning, without an end, beyond divided Time and beyond Space. 
Those " Angels," genii, or Devas, who were bom to act in space and 
time, i. e., to break through the seven circles of the superspiritual planes 
into the phenomenal, or circumscribed, super-terrestrial regions, are 
said allegorically to have rebelled against Kronos and fought the (then) 
one living and highest God. In his turn, when Kronos is represented 
as mutilating Uranus, his father, the meaning of this mutilation is very 
simple: Absolute Time is made to become the finite and the condi- 
tioned ; a portion is robbed from the whole, thus showing that Saturn, 
the father of the gods, has been transformed from Eternal Duration 
into a limited Period. Chronos cuts down with his scythe even the 
longest and (to us) seemingly endless cycles, yet, for all that, limited 
in Eternity, and puts down with the same scythe the mightiest rebels. 
Aye, not one will escape the scythe of Time! Praise the god or 
gods, or flout, one or both, and that scythe will not be made to tremble 
one millionth of a second in its ascending or descending course. 

The Titans of Hesiod's Theogony were copied in Greece from the 
Suras and Asuras of India. These Hesiodic Titans, the Uranides, 
numbered once upon a time as only six, have been recently discovered 
to be seven — the seventh being called Phoreg — in an old fragment 
relating to the Greek myth. Thus their identity with the Seven rectors 
is fully demonstrated. The origin of the " War in Heaven " and the 
Fall has, in our mind, to be traced unavoidably to India, and perhaps 



THE WAR OP THE GODS 



419 



far earlier than the Puranic accounts thereof. For Taramaya was in 
a later age, and there are three accounts, each of a distinct war, to be 
traced in almost every Cosmogony. 

The first war happened in the night of time, between the gods and 
the (A) -suras, and lasted for the period of one " divine year.""" On 
this occasion the deities were defeated by the Daityas, under the leader- 
ship of Hrada. After that, owing to a device of Vishnu, to whom the 
conquered gods applied for help, the latter defeated the Asuras. In 
the Vishnu Purana no interval is found between the two wars. In the 
Esoteric Doctrine, one war takes place before the building of the Solar 
system ; another, on earth, at the " creation " of man ; and a third 
" war " is mentioned as taking place at the close of the 4th Race, be- 
tween its adepts and those of the 5th Race, i. e., between the Initiates of 
the " Sacred Island " and the Sorcerers of Atlantis. We shall notice 
the first contest, as recounted by Parasara, while trying to separate the 
two accounts, purposely blended together. It is there stated that as the 
Daityas and Asuras were engaged in the duties of their respective orders 
(Varnas) and followed the paths prescribed by holy writ, practising also 
religious penance (a queer employment for demons if they are identical 
with our devils, as it is claimed) — it was impossible for the gods to 
destroy them. The prayers addressed by the gods to Vishnu are curious 
as showing the ideas involved in an anthropomorphic deity. Having, 
after their defeat, "fled to the Northern shore of the Milky Ocean 
(Atlantic Ocean ),*•• the discomfited gods address many supplications 
" to the first of beings, the divine Vishnu," and among others this one : 



585. One "Day of Brahm&" lasting 
4.320.000,000 yean — multiply this by 3651 
Hie Aauraa here (no-gods, but demons) are 
•till Suras, gods higher in hierarchy than 
audi secondary gods as are not eren men- 
tioned in the Vedas. The duration of the 
war shows its significance, and that they are 
only the personified Cosmic powers. It is 
eridently for sectarian purposes and out of 
cdimm thtohgicnm that the illusiye form aa^ 
•umed by Vishnu MAydmoha, was attributed 
in later re-arrangements of old texts to Bud- 
dha and the Daityas, in the Vuhnu Purina, 
unless it was a fancy of Wilson himself. He 
also fancied he found an allusion to Bud- 
dhism in BkagqvadgUAt whereas, as proved by 
K. T. Telang, he had only confused the Bud- 
dhists and the older Chinrika materialists. 
The version exists nowhere in other Purinaa 
if the inference does, as Professor Wilson 
claims, in the Vishnu PurAna; the trans- 
lation of which, especially of Book iii, ch. 
xriii, where tbc reverend Orientalist arbi- 



trarily introduces Buddha, and shows him 
teaching Buddhism to Daityas — led to an- 
other "great war" between himself and Col- 
onel Vans Kennedy. The latter charged him 
publicly with wilfully distorting Puranic 
texts. " I affirm," wrote the colonel at Bom- 
bay, in 1840, ** that the Puranas do not con- 
tain what Professor Wilson haa stated is 
contained in them . . . until such passages 
are produced I may be allowed to repeat 
my former conclusions, that Professor Wil- 
son's opinion, that the Puranas as now ex- 
tant are compilations made between the eighth 
and seventeenth centuries [A. D.l] rests sole- 
ly on gratuitous assumptions and unfounded 
assertions, and that his reasoning in support 
of it is either futile, fallacious, contradictory, 
or improbable." (See Vishnu PurAna, trans, 
by Wilson, edit by Fitzedward Hall, VoL 
V, Appendix.) 

586. This statement belongs to the third 
War, since the terrestrial continents, seas 
and rivers are mentioned in connexion with it. 



410 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

sophical sun; the water, within which the crocodile is swimming, is 
that water or matter made liquid ; the ship herself, finally, representing 
the vessel of nature, in which the sun, or the sulphuric, igneous prin- 
ciple, acts as a pilot: because it is the sun which conducts the work 
by his action upon the moist or mercury. The above is only for the 
Alchemists. 

The Serpent became the type and symbol of evil, and of the Devil, 
only during the middle ages. The early Christians — besides the Ophite 
Gnostics — had their dual Logos : the Good and the Bad Serpent, Ae 
Agathodaimon and the Kakodaimon. This is demonstrated by the 
writings of Markos, Valentinus, and many others, and especially in 
Pistis Sophia — certainly a document of the earliest centuries of Christ- 
ianity. On the marble sarcophagus of a tomb, discovered in 1852 
near the Porta Pia, one sees the scene of the adoration of the Magi, 
" or else," remarks the late C. W. King in " The Gnostics," " the proto- 
type of that scene, the * Birth of the New Sun.' " The mosaic floor 
exhibited a curious design which might have represented cither (a) 
Isis suckling the babe Harpokrates, or {b) the Madonna nursing the 
infant Jesus. In the smaller sarcophagi that surrounded the larger one, 
eleven leaden plates rolled like scrolls were found, three of which have 
been deciphered. The contents of these ought to be regarded as final 
proof of a much-vexed question, for they show that either the early 
Christians, up to the Vlth Century, were bona fide pagans, or that 
dogmatic Christianity was borrowed wholesale, and passed in full 
into the Christian Church — Sun, Tree, Serpent, Crocodile and alL 

On the first b seen Anubis . . . holding out a scroll; at his feet are two 
female busts; below all are two serpents entwined ... a corpse swathed up 
like a mummy. In the second scroll ... is Anubis, holding out a cross, the 
" Sign of Life." Under his feet lies the corpse encircled in the numerous folds 
of a huge serpent, the Agathodaemon, guardian of the deceased. ... In the 
third scroll, Anubis bears on his arm . . . the outline of ... a complete 
Latin cross. ... At the god's foot is a rhomboid, the Egyptian "Egg of the 
World," towards which crawls a serpent coiled into a circle, . . . Under the 
busts is the letter «d repeated seven times in a line, reminding one of the ** names." 
. . . Very remarkable also is the line of characters, apparently Palmyrene, upon 
the legs of the first Anubis. As for the figure of the serpent, supposing these 
talismans to emanate not from the Isiac but the newer Ophite creed, it may 
well stand for that "True and perfect Serpent," who leads forth the souls of 
all that put their trust in him out of the Egypt of the body, and through the 
Red Sea of Death into the Land of Promise, saving them on their way from 
the Serpents of the Wilderness, that is, from the Rulers of the Stars,"* 

And this " True and Perfect Serpent " is the seven-lettered God who 
is now credited with being Jehovah, and Jesus One with him. To this 

S7S. Kinc't TA# GnPsHes and thtir Remaims, p. S66. 



THE MYSTERY OF THE SEVEN THUNDERS ^^ 

Seven-vowelled god the candidate for initiation is sent by Christos, in 
the Pistis Sophia, a work earlier than St. John's Revelation, and evi- 
dently of the same school. "The [Serpent of the] Seven Thunders 
uttered these seven vowels/' but " Seal up those things which the seven 
thunders uttered, and write them not," says Revelation, " Do ye seek 
after these mysteries? " inquires Jesus m Pistis Sophia. " No mystery 
is more excellent than they [the seven vowels] : for they shall bring 
your souls unto the Light of Lights " — i. e., true Wisdom. " Nothing, 
therefore, is more excellent than the mysteries which ye seek after, 
saving only the mystery of the Seven Vowels and their Forty and 
NINE Powers, and the numbers thereof." 

In India, it was the mystery of the Seven Fires and their forty-nine 
fires or aspects, or " the members thereof," just the same. 

These seven vowels are represented by the Svastika signs on the 
crowns of the seven heads of the Serpent of Eternity, in India, among 
esoteric Buddhists, in Eg)rpt, in Chaldaea, etc., etc., and among the 
Initiates of every other country. It is on the Seven zones of post 
mortem ascent, in the Hermetic writings, that the " mortal " leaves, on 
each, one of his " Souls " (or Principles) ; until arrived on the plane 
above all zones he remains as the great Formless Serpent of absolute 
wisdom — or the Deity itself. The seven-headed serpent has more than 
one signification in the Arcane teachings. It is the seven-headed Draco, 
each of whose heads is a star of the Lesser Bear; but it was also, and 
pre-eminently, the Serpent of Darkness (». e., inconceivable and incom- 
prehensible) whose seven heads were the seven Logoi, the reflections 
of the one and first manifested Light — the universal Logos. 



§ XI 

DAEMON EST DEUS INVERSUS 

This symbolical sentence, in its many-sided forms, is certainly most 
dangerous and iconoclastic in the face of all the dualistic later religions 
— or rather theologies — and especially so in the light of Christianity. 
Yet it is neither just nor correct to say that it is Christianity which 
has conceived and brought forth Satan. As an "adversary," the 
opposing Power required by the equilibrium and harmony of things 
in Nature — like Shadow to throw off still brighter the Light, like 
Night to bring into greater relief the Day, and like cold to make one 
appreciate the more the comfort of heat — Satan has ever existed. 
Homogeneity is one and indivisible. But if the homogeneous One and 
Absolute is no mere figure of speech, and if heterogeneity in its dual- 
istic aspect, is its offspring — its bif urcous shadow or reflection — then 



422 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

the tempting Serpent in the Garden of Eden ; sends Satan with a spe- 
cial mission to tempt Job; and harasses and wearies Pharaoh with 
Sarai, Abraham's wife, and "hardens" his heart against Moses, lest 
there should be no opportunity for plaguing his victims " with great 
plagues " ••* — Vishnu is made in his Purana to resort to a trick no 
less unworthy of any respectable god. 

"Have compassion upon us, O Lord, and protect us, who have come to thee 
for succor from the Daityas (demons) I " pray the defeated Gods. ** They 
have seized upon the three worlds, and appropriated the offerings which are our 
portion, faking care nof to transgress the precepts of the Veda. Although we, as 
well as they, are parts of thee^* , . . engaged as they are in the paths pre- 
scribed by the holy writ ... it is impossible for us to destroy them. Do 
thou, whose wisdom is immeasurable (Amey&tman) instruct us in some device 
by which we may be able to exterminate the enemies of the godsl" 

When the mighty Vishnu heard their request, he emitted from his body an 
illusory form (Mayamoha, "the deluder by illusion") which he gave to the 
Gods and thus spake: "This M&yamoha shall wholly beguile the Daityas, so 
that being led astray from the path of the Vedas, they may be put to death. 
... Go then and fear not Let this delusive vision precede you. It shall this 
day be of great service unto you, O Gods!" 

After this, the great Delusion, Mdydmoha, descending to earth, beheld the 
Daityas engaged in ascetic penances, and approaching them, in the semblance 
of a Digambara (naked mendicant) with his head shaven ... he thus addressed 
them, in gentle accents: "Ho, lords of the Daitya race, wherefore is it that 
ye practise these acts of penances?" etc, etc"" 

Finally the Daityas were seduced by the wily talk of May&moha, as 
Eve was seduced by the advice of the Serpent They became apostates 
to the Vedas. As Dr. Muir translates the passage: — 

The Great Deceiver, practising illusion, next beguiled other Daityas, by means 
of many other sorts of heresy. In a very short time, these Asuras (Daityas) 
deluded by the Deceiver [who was Vishnu] abandoned the entire system founded 
on the ordinances of the triple Veda. Some reviled the Vedas, others the (jods, 
others the ceremonial of sacrifice, and others the Brahmans. This, they ex- 
claimed, is a doctrine which will not bear discussion. The slaughter of animals 
in sacrifice is not conducive to religious merit To say that oblations of batter 
consumed in the fire produce any future reward, is the assertion of a child 
... If it be a fact that a beast slain in sacrifice is exalted to heaven, why does 
not the worshiper slaughter his own father? . . . Infallible utterances do not, 
grrcat Asuras, fall from the skies; it is only assertions founded on reasoning 
that are accepted by me and by other [intelligent] persons like yourselves I 
Thus by numerous methods the Daityas were unsettled by the great Deceiver 
[Reason], . . . When they had entered on the path of error, the gods mustered 

591. Genesis xii; Bxodut, with his brothers, also before tbc Lord** 

592. " There wu m daj when the Sons of {Job U, AbyM., Bthiopic text). 
Cod came before the Lord, and Satan came 593. Book III, xWii. 



THE DECEPTION, AN ALLEGORY 423 

all their ener^es and approached to battle. Then followed a combat between 
the gods and the Asuras; and the latter, who had abandoned the right road, 
were smitten by the former. In previous times they had been defended by the 
armour of righteousness which they bore, but when that had been destroyed 
they, also, perished."^ 

Whatever may be thought of Hindus, no enemy of theirs can regard 
them as fools. A people whose holy men and sages have left to the 
world the greatest and most sublime philosophies that ever emanated 
from the minds of men, must have known the difference between right 
and wrong. Even a savage can discern white from black, good from 
bad, and deceit from sincerity and truthfulness. Those who had nar- 
rated this event in the biography of their god, must have seen that in 
this case it was that God who was the arch-Deceiver, and the Daityas, 
who "never transgressed the precepts of the Vcdas," who had the 
sunny side in the transaction, and who were the true " Gods." Thence 
there must have been, and there is a secret meaning hidden under this 
sUegory. In no class of Society, in no nation, are deceit and craft 
considered as Divine virtues — except perhaps in the clerical classes 
of theologians and modem Jesuitism. 

The Vishnu Pur&na,^*^ like all other works of this kind, has passed 
at a later period into the hands of the temple-Brahmans, and the old 
MSS. have, no doubt, been once more tampered with by sectarians. 
But there was a time when the Puranas were esoteric works, and so 
they are still for the Initiates who can read them with the key that is 
in their possession. 

Whether the Brahman Initiates will ever give out the full meaning of 
these allegories, is a question with which the writer is not concerned. 
The present object is to show that, while honoring the creative Powers 
in their multiple forms, no philosopher could, or ever has, accepted the 
allegory for the true Spirit, except, perhaps, some philosophers belong- 
ing to the present " superior and civilized " Christian races. For, as 
shown, Jehovah is not one whit the superior of Vishnu on the plane of 
ethics. This is why the Occultists and even some Kabalists, whether 
they r^;ard or not those creative Forces as living and conscious Entities 
— and one does not see why they should not be so accepted — will never 
confuse the Cause with the effect, and accept the Spirit of the Earth 
for Parabrahm or Ain-Soph. At all events they know well the true 
nature of what was called Father-Aether by the Greeks, Jupiter-Titan, 
etc., etc. They know that the soul of the Astral Light is divine, and 

594. Jonmal of the Royal Atiat. Society, in its present form it is not earlier than be« 
VoL XDC, p. 302. tween the Vlllth and the XVIIth (II) oen- 

595. Wilson's opinion that the Vishnu tury, is absurd beyond noticing. 
Purina is a production of our era, and that 



414 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

who would become an automaton without the exercise of his free will 
and aspirations after that sunlight, which would lose its being and value 
for him had he nothing but light. Good is infinite and eternal only in the 
eternally concealed from us, and this is why we imagine it eternal. On 
the manifested planes, one equilibrates the other. Few are those theists 
and believers in a personal God, who do not make of Satan the shadow 
of God; or who, confounding both, do not beUeve they have a right 
to pray to that idol asking its help and protection for the exercise 
and impunity of their evil and cruel deeds. " Lead us not into Tempta- 
tion " is adch-essed daily to " our Father, which art in Heaven," and not 
to the Devil, by millions of human Christian hearts. They do so, repeat- 
ing the very words put in the mouth of their Savior, and do not give 
one thought to the fact that their meaning is contradicted point blank 
by James " the brother of the Lord." " Let no man say when he is 
tempted, I am tempted of God : for God cannot be tempted with evil, 
neither tempteth he any man." •^^ Why, then, say that it is the Devil 
who tempts us, when the Church teaches us on the authority of Christ 
that it is God who does so? Open any pious volume in which the word 
" temptation " is defined in its theological sense, and forthwith you find 
two definitions: (1) " Those afflictions and troubles whereby God tries 
his people''; (2) Those means and enticements which the Devil makes 
use of to ensnare and allure mankind.**® If accepted literally, the two 
teachings of Christ and James contradict each other, and what dogma 
can reconcile the two if the occult meaning is rejected? 

Between the alternative allurements, wise will be that philosopher 
who will be able to decide where God disappears to make room for the 
Devil ! Therefore when we read that " the Devil is a liar and the 
father of it," *. e,, incarnate i#iE, and are told in the same breath 
that Satan — the Devil — was a son of God and the most beautiful of 
his archangels, rather than believe that Father and Son are a gigantic, 
personified and eternal lie, we prefer to turn to Pantheism and to 
Pagan philosophy for information. 

Once that the key to Genesis is in our hands, it is the scientific and 
symbolical Kabala which unveils the secret. The great Serpent of 
the Garden of Eden and the " Lord God " are identical, and so arc 
Jehovah and Cain one — that Cain who is referred to in theology as 
the "murderer" and the liar to God! Jehovah tempts the King of 
Israel to number the people, and Satan tempts him to do the same in 
another place. Jehovah turns into the fiery serpents to bite those he is 
displeased with; and Jehovah informs the brazen serpent that heals 
them. 

These short, and seemingly contradictory, statements in the Old 

579. Tk0 Gen, Bp. of James, L 13. 580. St, James L 2, 12; and AfaW. tL IX 



THEOUKilCAI, ETYMOLOGIES 



415 



Testament (contradictory because the two Powers are separated instead 
of being regarded as the two faces of one and the same thing) are the 
echoes — distorted out of recognition by exotericism and theology — of 
the universal and philosophical dogmas in nature, so well understood 
by the primitive Sages. We find the same groimdwork in several per- 
sonifications in the Puranas, only far more ample and philosophically 
suggestive. 

Thus Pulast)ra, a " Son of God " — one of the first progeny — is 
made the progenitor of Demons, the Rakshasas, the tempters and the 
Devourers of men. Piiachi (female Demon) is a daughter of Daksha, 
a " Son of God " too, and a God, and the mother of all the Pisachas.**^ 
The Demons, so called in the Puranas, are very extraordinary devils 
when judged from the standpoint of European and orthodox views 
about these creatures, since all of them — Danavas, Daityas, Pisachas, 
and the Rakshasas — are represented as extremely pious, following the 
precepts of the Vedas, some of them even being great Yogis. But they 
oppose the clergy and Ritualism, sacrifices and forms — just what the 
full-blown Yogins do to this day in India — and are no less respected 
for it, though they are allowed to follow neither caste nor ritual ; hence 
all those Puranic giants and Titans are called Devils. The Mission- 
aries, ever on the watch to show, if they can, the Hindu traditions no 
better than a reflection of the Jewish Bible, have evolved a whole rom- 
ance on the alleged identity of Pulastya with Cain, and of the Rak- 
shasas with the Cainites, " the accursed," the cause of the Noachian 
Deluge. (See the work of Abbe Gorresio, who "etymologizes" Pul- 
astya's name as meaning the "rejected," hence Cain, if you please). 
Pulast)ra dwells in Kedara, he says, which means a " dug-up place," a 
mine, and Cain is shown in tradition and the Bible as the first worker 
in metals and a miner thereof I 

While it is very probable that the Gibborim (the giants) of the Bible 
are the Rakshasas of the Hindus, it is still more certain that both are 
Atlanteans, and belong to the submerged races. However it may be, 
no Satan could be more persistent in slandering his enemy, or more 
spiteful in his hatred, than the Christian theologians are in cursing him 
as the father of every evil. Compare their vituperations and opinions 
given about the Devil with the philosophical views of the Puranic sages 
and their Christ-like mansuetude. When Parasara, whose father was 
devoured by a Rakshasa, was preparing himself to destroy (magically) 
the whole race, his grandsire, Vasishtha, says a few extremely suggest- 
ive words to him. He shows the irate sage, on his own confession, 
that there is Evil and Karma, but no " evil spirits." He says : 

Let thy wrath be appeased. The Rakshasas are not culpable; thy father's 

58 1. Padma PurAna. 



416 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

death was the work of Karma, Anger is the passion of fools ; it becometh not 
a wise man. By whom, it may he asked, is any one killed? Every man reaps 
the consequences of his own acts. Anger, my son, is the destruction of all that 
man obtains . . . and prevents the attainment of emancipation. The sages shun 
wrath. Be not thou, my child, subject to its influence. Let not those unoffending 
spirits of darkness be consumed ; let thy sacrifice cease. Mercy is the might of 
the righteous."* 

Thus, every such " sacrifice " or prayer to God for help is no better 
than an act of black magic. That which Para^ra prayed for, was the 
destruction of the Spirits of Darkness, for his personal revenge. He 
is called a Pagan, and the Christians have doomed him as such, to 
eternal hell. Yet, in what respect is the prayer of sovereigns and 
generals, who pray before every battle for the destruction of their 
enemy, any better? Such a prayer is in every case black magic of the 
worst kind, concealed like a demon " Mr. Hyde " under a sanctimonious 
" Dr. JekyU." 

In human nattu-e, evil denotes only the polarity of matter and Spirit, 
a struggle for life between the two manifested Principles in Space and 
Time, which principles are one per se, inasmuch as they are rooted in 
the Absolute. In Kosmos, the equilibrium must be preserved. The 
operations of the two contraries produce harmony, like the centri- 
petal and centrifugal forces, which are necessary to each other — 
mutually inter-dependent — "in order that both should live." If one 
is arrested, the action of the other will become immediately self- 
destructive. 

Since the personification called Satan has been amply analysed from 
its triple aspect — in the Old Testament, Christian theology and the an- 
cient Gentile attitude of thought — those who would learn more of it arc 
referred to Vol. II of Isis Unveii*Ed, chap, x.*** The present subject is 
touched upon and fresh explanations attempted for a very good reason. 
Before we can approach the evolution of physical and divine man, 
we have first to master the idea of cyclic evolution, to acquaint our- 
selves with the philosophies and beliefs of the four races which pre- 
ceded our present race, to learn what were the ideas of those Titans 
and giants — giants, verily, mentally as well as physically. The whole 
of antiquity was imbued with that philosophy which teaches the involu- 
tion of spirit into matter, the progressive, downward cyclic descent, 
or active, self-conscious evolution. The Alexandrian Gnostics have 
sufficiently divulged the secret of initiations, and their records arc 
full of " the sliding down of Aeons " in their double qualification of 
Angelic Beings and Periods: the one the natural evolution of the 

582. Vishnu PurAna, Book I. ch. L 
583. See alto Kireral KCtions in Book II, Part II of this work. 



THE ANGELS SLANDERED 417 

othen On the other hand, Oriental traditions on both sides of the 
" black water " — the oceans that separate the two Basts — are as full 
of allegories about the downfall of Pleroma, of that of the gods and 
Devas. One and all, they allegorized and explained the Fall as the 
desire to learn and acquire knowledge — to know. This is the natural 
sequence of mental evolution, the spiritual becoming transmuted into 
the material or physical. The same law of descent into materiality 
and re-ascent into spirituality asserted itself during the Christian era, 
the reaction having stopped only just now, in our own special sub-race. 

That which, perhaps ten millenniums ago, was allegorized in Pyman- 
der in a triune character of interpretation, meant as a record of an 
astronomical, anthropological, and even alchemical fact, namely, the 
allegory of the seven rectors breaking through the seven circles of fire, 
was dwarfed into one material and anthropomorphic interpretation — 
the rebellion and Fall of the Angels. The multivocal, profoundly philo- 
sophical narrative, under its poetical form of the " Marriage of Heaven 
with Earth," the love of nature for Divine form and the " Heavenly 
man," enraptured with his own beauty mirrored in nature — i. e.. Spirit 
attracted into matter — has now become, under theological handling: 
"the seven Rectors disobeying Jehovah, self admiration generating 
Satanic Pride, followed by their Fall, Jehovah permitting no worship 
to be lost save upon himself." In short, the beautiful Planet-Angels, the 
glorious cyclic aeons of the ancients, became henceforward S3mthesized 
in their most orthodox shape in Samael, the chief of the Demons in the 
Talmud, " That great serpent with twelve wings that draws down after 
himself, in his Fall, the solar system, or the Titans." But Schemal, 
the alter ego and the Sabean type of Samael, meant, in his philosophical 
and esoteric aspect, the " year " in its astrological evil aspect, its twelve 
months or wings of unavoidable evils, in nature ; and in esoteric theo- 
gony,*'* both Schemal and Samael represented a particular divinity. 
Witfi the Kabalists they are "the Spirit of the Earth," the personal 
god that governs it, identical de facto with Jehovah. For the Talmud- 
ists admit themselves that Samael is a god-name of one of the seven 
Elohim. The Kabalists, moreover, show the two, Schemal and Samael, 
as a symbolical form of Saturn, Chronos, the twelve wings standing 
for the 12 months, and the symbol in its collectivity representing a 
racial cycle. Jehovah and Saturn are also glyphically identical. 

This leads in its turn to a very curious deduction from a Roman 
Catholic dogma. Many renowned writers belonging to the Latin Church 
admit that a difference exists, and should be made, between the Uranian 
Titans, the antediluvian giants (also Titans), and those post-diluvian 
giants in whom they (the Roman Catholics) will see the descendants of 

584. Se« Cbwoltohn in Nabathsan Agkicultusx, Vol. n, p. 217. 



428 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

and the androgyne of Plato, which is but another version of the Indian 
symbol. 

The best metaphysical definition of primeval theogony in the spirit 
of the Vedantins may be found in the Notes on the Bhagavad-GUa, 
by Mr. T. Subba Rao.*®' Parabrahmam, the unknown and inc(^- 
nizable, as the lecturer tells his audience: 

... Is not Ego, it is not non-«go, nor is it consciousness ... it is not even 
Atman . . . but though not itself an object of knowledge, it is yet capable of 
supporting and giving rise to every kind of object and every kind of existence 
which becomes an object of knowledge. It is the one essence from which starts 
into existence a center of energy. . . . [which he calls Logos.] 

This Logos is the Sabda Brahmam of the Hindus, which he will not 
even call th/ara (the " lord " God), lest the term should create confu- 
sion in the people's minds. But it is the Avalokiteivara of the Hindus, 
the Verbum of the Christians in its real esoteric meaning, not in the 
theological disfigurement He says: 

It is the Jndta or the Ego in the Kosmos, and every other Ego ... is but 
its reflection and manifestation. ... It exists in a latent condition in the 
bosom of Parabrahmam at the time of Pralaya, . . . [During Manvantara] 
it has a consciousness and an individuality of its own ... [It is a center of 
energy, but] . . . such centers of energy are almost innumerable in the bosom 
of Parabrahmam. ... It must not be supposed, that even the logos is the 
Creator, or that it is but a single center of energy . . . their number is almost 
infinite. . . . This Ego [he adds] is the first that appears in Kosmos, and is 
the end of all evolution. It is the abstract Ego . . . this is the first manifesta- 
tion (or aspect) of Parabrahmam. . . . When once it starts into conscious 
being . . . from its objective standpoint, Parabrahmam appears to it as 
MUlaprakriti. Please bear this in mind, [observes the lecturer] for here is 
the root of the whole difficulty about Pumsha and Prakriti felt by the various 
writers on Vedandc philosophy. This MUlaprakriti is material to it [the Logos], 
as any material object is material to us. This MiUaprakriti is no more Para^ 
brahmam than the bundle of attributes of a pillar is the pillar 'itself; Para- 
brahmam is an unconditioned and absolute reality, and Mulaprakriti is a sort 
of veil thrown over it Parabrahmam by itself cannot be seen as it is. It is 
seen by the Logos with a veil thrown over it, and that veil is the mighty expanse 
of Cosmic matter. . . . Parabrahmam, after having appeared on the one hand 
as the Ego, and on the other as Mulaprakriti, acts as the one energy through 
the Logos. 

And the lecturer explains what he means by this acting of something 
which is nothing, though it is the all, by a fine simile. He compares 
the Logos to the sun through which light and heat radiate, but whose 
energy, light and heat, exist in some unknown condition in Space and 

605. See Thtosophist for Pebmary, 1887. 



THE ONE IS KNOWN BY THE MANY 429 

are diffused in Space only as visible light and heat, the sun being only 
the agent thereof. This is the first triadic hypostasis. The quaternary 
is made up by the energizing light shed by the Logos. 

The Hebrew Kabalists give it in a shape which esoterically is identi- 
cal with the Vedantic. Ain-Soph, they taught, could not be compre- 
hended, could not be located, nor named, though the causeless cause 
of all. Hence its name — Ain-Soph — is a term of negation, "the 
inscrutable, the incognizable, and the unnamable." They made of it, 
therefore, a boundless circle, a sphere, of which human intellect, with 
the utmost stretch, could only perceive the vault. In the words of one 
who has unriddled much in the Kabalistical system, in one of its mean- 
ings thoroughly, in its numerical and geometrical esotericism: 

Close your eyes, and from your consciousness of perception try and think 
outward to the extremest limits in every direction. You will find that equal 
lines or rays of perception extend out evenly in all directions, so that the utmost 
effort of perception will terminate in the vault of a sphere. The limitation of 
this sphere will, of necessity, be a great Circle, and the direct rays of thought 
in any and every direction must be right line radii of the circle. This, then, 
must be, humanly speaking, the extremest all-embracing conception of the Ain- 
Soph manifest, which formulates itself as a geometrical figure, viz., of a circle, 
with its elements of curved circumference and right line diameter divided into 
radii Hence, a geometrical shape is the first recognisable means of connection 
between the Ain-Soph and the intelligence of man«*~ 

This great circle (which Eastern Esotericism reduces to the point 
within the Boundless Circle) is the Avalokitesvara, the Logos or Ver- 
bum of which Mr. Subba Rao speaks. But this circle or manifested God 
is as unknown to us, except through its manifested universe, as the ONg 
though easier, or rather more possible to our hi^est conceptions. This 
Logos which sleeps in the bosom of Parabrahmam during Pralaya, as 
our " Ego is latent (in us) at the time of sushupti, sleep " ; which can- 
not cognize Parabrahmam, otherwise than as Mulaprakriti — the latter 
being a cosmic veil which is " the mi^^ty expanse of cosmic matter " 

— b thus only an organ in cosmic creation, throtigh which radiate the 
energy and wisdom of Parabrahmam, unknown to the Logos, as it is to 
ourselves. Moreover, as the Logos is as unknown to us as Parabrahm- 
am is unknown in reality to the Logos, both Eastern Esotericism and the 
Kabala — in order to bring the Logos within the range of oar conce|>- 
tions — have resolved the abstract s vnthesis into concrete images ; viz, 
into the reflections or multiplied aspects of that Logos or Avalokitesvara' 
Brahma, Ormazd, Osiris, Adam-Kadmon, call it by any of these names' 

— which aspects or Manvantaric emanations are the Dhyan Chohans 



«0^ Prwi The Masonic Kroirm Ur Joiw, lAM^ 



430 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

the Elohim, the Devas, the Amshaspends, etc., etc Metaphysicians 
explain the root and germ of the latter, according to Mr. Subba Rao, 
as the first manifestation of Parabrahmam, " the highest trinity that wc 
are capable of understanding," which is MUlaprakriti (the veil), the 
Logos, and the conscious energy "of the latter," or its power and 
light ;*®^ or — " matter, force and the Ego, or the one root of self, of 
which every other kind of self is but a manifestation or a reflection." 
It is then only in this "light" (of consciousness) of mental and 
physical perception, that practical Occultism can throw this into visi- 
bility by geometrical figures; which, when closely studied, will yield 
not only a scientific explanation of the real, objective, existence •**• of 
the " Seven sons of the divine Sophia," which is this light of the 
Logos, but show by means of other yet undiscovered keys that, with 
regard to Humanity, these " Seven Sons " and their numberless emana- 
tions, centers of energy personified, are an absolute necessity. Make 
away with them, and the mystery of Being and Mankind will never be 
unriddled, not even closely approached. 

It is through this light that everything is created. This root of 
mental self is also the root of physical Self, for this light is the per- 
mutation, in our manifested world, of Mulaprakriti, called Aditi in the 
Vedas. In its third aspect it becomes Vach,*^ the daughter and the 
mother of the Logos, as Isis is the daughter and the mother of Osiris, 
who is Horus; and Mut, the daughter, wife, and mother of Ammon, in 
the Egyption Moon-glyph. In the Kabala, Sephira is the same as She- 
kinah, and is, in another synthesis, the wife, daughter, and mother of 
the " Heavenly man," Adam Kadmon, and is even identical with him, 
just as Vach is identical with Brahma, and is called the female Logos. 
In the Rig Veda, Vach is "mystic speech," by whom Occult Know- 
ledge and Wisdom are communicated to man, and thus Vach is said to 
have " entered the Rishis." She is " generated by the gods " ; she is 
the divine Vach — the " Queen of gods " ; and she is associated — like 
Sephira with the Sephiroth — with the Prajapati in their work of crea- 
tion. Moreover, she is called " the mother of the Vedas," "since it is 
through her power (as mystic speech) that Brahma revealed them, and 
also owing to her power that he produced the imiverse" — i.e,, through 
speech, and words (synthesized by the "word") and numbers.*** 

But Vach being also spoken of as the daughter of Daksha — " the god 

607. Called, In the Bkatovad-Cttd, DaM- ing. be called his dauffhter." (" Notes oa the 

pnkriH, Bhagavad-Gttd/* p. 305, Thtpsephiti} 

60B. Objective -^in the world of Mly^ 610. The wise men, like Stanley Jrroos 

of course; still as real as we are. amongst the modems, who inrented the 

609. *' In the course of cosmic manifests* scheme which makes the inco mp re h e n sible 

tion, this DaiviprckriH, instead of being the assume a tangible form, could only do so by 

mother of the Logos, should, strictly speak- resorting to numbers and geometrical 



THE FEMALE IXXK)I 431 

who lives in all the Kalpas " — her Mayavic character is thereby shown : 
during the pralaya she disappears, absorbed in the one, all-devouring 
Ray. 

But there are two distinct aspects in universal Esotericism, Eastern 
and Western, in all those personations of the female Power in nature, 
or nature — the noumenal and the phenomenal. One is its purely 
metaphysical aspect, as described by the learned lecturer in his Notes 
on the Bhagavad'Gita; the other terrestrial and physical, and at the 
same time divine from the stand-point of practical human conception 
and Occultism. They are all the symbols and personifications of Chaos, 
the " Great Deep " or the Primordial Waters of Space, the impenetrable 
VEIL between the incognizable and the Locos of Creation. "Con- 
necting himself through his mind with Vach, Brahma (the Logos) 
created the primordial waters." In the Kathaka Upanishad it is stated 
still more clearly : " Prajapati was this Universe. Vach was a second 
to him. He associated with her . . . she produced these creatures 
and again re-entered Prajapati." '^^ 

And here we may incidentally point out one of the many unjust slurs 
thrown by the pious and good missionaries in India on the religion of 
the land. This allegory — in the Satapatha Br&hmana — namely, that 
Brahma, as the father of men, performed the work of procreation by 
incestuous intercourse with his own daughter Vach, also called San- 
dhyk (twilight), and Satariipa (the hundred formed), is incessantly 
thrown into the teeth of the Brahmans, as condemning their " detestable, 
false religion." Besides the fact, conveniently forgotten by the Euro- 
peans, that the Patriarch Lot is shown guilty of the same crime under 
the human form, whereas Brahma, or rather Prajapati, accomplished 
the incest under the form of a buck with his daughter, who had that of a 
hind (foAi/),the esoteric reading of Genesis^^* shows the same. More- 
over, there is certainly a cosmic, not a physiological meaning attached 
to the Indian allegory, since Vach is a permutation of Aditi and Mula- 
prakriti (Chaos), and Brahma is a permutation of Narayana, the Spirit 
of God entering into, and fructifying nature ; therefore, there is nothing 
ph€Ulic in the conception at all. 

As already stated, Aditi- Vach is the female Logos, or the " word," 
Verbum; and Sephira in the Kabala is the same. These feminine 
Logoi are all correlations, in their noumenal aspect, of Light, and 

611. This connects Vich and Sephira wkh the voice that speaks audibly to the 

with the goddeis Kwan-Yin, the " mercHul Initiate, according to Esoteric Baddhism. 

mother,** the divine voict of the soul even Bath Kol, the filia Vocis, the daughter of 

in Exoteric Buddhism; and with the female the divine voice of the Hebrews, responding 



of KwanShoi'Yin, the Logos, the from the mercj seat within the veil of the 
Vtfbnm of Creation, and at the same time temple is — a result 

612. Chapter Hi. 



432 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

Sound, and Ether, showing how well-informed were the ancients both 
in physical science (as now known to the modems), and as to the 
birth of that science in the Spiritual and Astral spheres. 

Our old writers said that V&ch is of four kinds . . . pard, paSyanH, ma- 
dhyatnd, vaikhari. (A statement found in the Rig-Veda and the Upanishads.) 
. . . Vaikhari Vach is what we utter. [It is sound, speech, that again whkh 
becomes comprehensive and objective to one of our physical senses and may be 
brought under the laws of perception. Hence:] . . . Every kind of Vaikhari 
Vdch exists in its Madhyamd . . . Palyantt and ultimately in its Pard form. 
. . . The reason why this Pranava'" is called Vach is this, that these four 
principles of the great Kosmos correspond to these four forms of Vach. . . . 
The whole Kosmos in its objective form is Vaikhari Vach; the light of the 
Logos is the madhyamd form; and the Logos itself the palyanti form; while 
Parabrahmam is the pard [beyond the noumenon of all Noumena] aspect of that 
Vach.~ 

Thus Vach, Shekinah, or the " music of the spheres " of Pythagoras, 
are one, if we take for our exan^le instances in the three most (appar- 
ently) dissimilar religious philosophies in the world — the Hindu, the 
Greek and the Chaldaean Hebrew. These personations and allegories 
may be viewed under four (chief) and three (lesser) aspects or seven 
in all, as in Esotericism. The pard form is the ever subjective and 
latent Light and Sound, which exist eternally in the bosom of the 
INCOGNIZABLE; when transferred into the ideation of the Logos, or its 
latent light, it is called paiyanti, and when it becomes that light ex- 
pressed, it is madhyamd. 

Now the Kabala gives the definition thus : " There are three kinds 
of light, and that (fourth) which interpenetrates the others; (1) the 
clear and the penetrating, the objective light, (2) the reflected light, and 
(3) the abstract lig^t." The ten Sephiroth, the three and the Seven, arc 
called in the Kabala the 10 words, d-brim (Dabarim), the numbers 
and the Emanations of the heavenly light, which is both Adam Kadmon 
and Sephira, or (Brahma) Prajapati-Vach. Light, Sound, Number, arc 
the three factors of creation in the Kabala. Parabrahmam cannot be 
known except through the luminous Point (the Locos), which knows 
not Parabrahmam but only Mtilaprakriti, Similarly Adam Kadmon 
knew only Shekinah, though he was the vehicle of Ain-Soph. And, as 
Adam Kadmon, he is in the esoteric interpretation the total of the num- 
ber ten, the Sephiroth (himself a trinity, or the three attributes of the 

613. Pranava, like Om, U m mystic term mre pronoanced with breatk tuppreaieiL Sec 

pronounced bj the Yoftt during meditation; hfanu II, 76-81, and Mii6kshar6 comimtnimg 

ot the terms called, according to exoteric on the YdjUavaUtyaSmriH, I, 2X But the 

Commentators, VyAkriiit, or " Om, BMr, esoteric explanatkm goes a gremt deal 

Bkuva, Svar " (Om, earth, sky, heaven) — further. 

Pranava ia the most sacred perhaps. They 614. Notes on the Bhatavad-CUM. 



THE PYTHAGOREAN IDEA 433 

incognizable Deity in One).*** " When the Heavenly man (or Logos) 
first assumed the form of the Crown*** (Kether) and identified himself 
with Sephira, he caused seven splendid lights to emanate from it (the 
Crown)," which made in their totality ten; so the Brahma- Prajapati, 
once he became separated from, yet identical with Vach, caused the 
seven Rishis, the seven Manus or Prajapatis to issue from that crown. 
In Exotericism one will always find 10 and 7, of either Sephiroth or 
Prajapati ; in Esoteric rendering always 3 and 7, which yield also 10. 
Only when divided in the manifested sphere into 3 and 7, they form 

\\jf the androgyne, and ^h), or the figure X manifested and dif- 
ferentiated. 

This will help the student to understand why Pjrthagoras esteemed the 
Deity (the Logos) to be the center of unity and " Source of Harmony." 
We say this Deity was the Logos, not the monad that dwelleth in 
Solitude and Silence, because Pythagoras taught that unity being in- 
divisible is no number. And this is also why it was required of the 
candidate, who applied for admittance into Ids school, that he should 
have already studied as a preliminary step, the Sciences of Arithmetic, 
Astronomy, Geometry and Music, held as the four divisions of Mathe- 
matics.**^ Again, this explains why the Pythagoreans asserted that the 
doctrine of Numbers — the chief of all in Esotericism — had been re- 
vealed to man by the celestial deities ; that the world had been called 
forth out of Chaos by Sound or Harmony, and constructed according 

the principles of musical proportion; that the seven planets which 
rule the destiny of mortals have a harmonious motion " and intervals 
corresponding to musical diastemes, rendering various sounds, so per- 
fectly consonant, that they produce the sweetest melody, which is in- 
audible to us, only by reason of the greatness of the sound, which our 
ears are incapable of receiving."*** 

In the Pythagorean Theogony the hierarchies of the heavenly Host 
and Gods were numbered and expressed numerically. P)rthagoras had 
studied Esoteric Science in India ; therefore we find his pupils saying : 

The monad (the manifested one) is the principle of all things. From the 
Monad and the indeterminate duad (Chaos), numbers; from numbers, Points; 

615. It U this trinity that b meant by 616. Chaldaean Book of Numbtrs, In 

"the three steps of Vishnu"; which means: the current Kabala the name Jehovah re- 

(Vishnti beinc considered as the Infinite in places Adam Kadmon. 
ea o teiic i sm) — that from the Parabrahm is- 

•oed M&U^rakriti, Pnnisha (the Logos), and 617. Justin Martyr tells us that owing 

Prakriti: the four forms (with itself, the to his ignorance of these four sciences, he 

synthesis) of Vich. And in the Kabala — was rejected by the Pjrthagoreans as a 

Ain-Soph, Shekinah, Adam Kadmon and Se- candidate for admission into their schooL 
phira, the four — or the three emanations 

bdag distinct — jet ONt. 618. Censorinus. 



434 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

from points, Lines; from lines, Superficies; from superficies, SoUds; from 
these, solid Bodies, whose elements are four — Fire, Water, Air, Earth; of all 
which transmuted (correlated), and totally changed, the world consists.** 

And this may also, if it does not unriddle the mystery altogether, at 
any rate lift a comer of the veil off those wondrous allegories that have 
been thrown upon Vach, the most mysterious of all the Brahmanical 
goddesses, she who is termed "the melodious cow who milked fordi 
sustenance and water " (the Earth with all her mystic powers) ; and 
again she " who yields us nourishment and sustenance '' (physical 
Earth). Isis is also mystic Nature and also Earth; and her cow's 
horns identify her with Vach. The latter, after having been recognized 
in her highest form as par&, becomes at the lower or material end of 
creation — Vaikhari. Hence she is mystic, though physical. Nature, 
with all her magic ways and properties. 

Again, as goddess of Speech and of Sotmd, and a permutation of 
Aditi — she is Chaos, in one sense. At any rate, she is the *' Mother of 
the gods," and it is from Brahma (tSvara, or the Logos) and Vach, as 
from Adam Kadmon and Sephira, that the real manifested theogony 
has to start. Beyond, all is darkness and abstract speculation. With 
the Dhyan Chohans, or the gods, the Seers, the Prophets and the adepts 
in general are on firm ground. Whether as Aditi, or the dizHne Sophia 
of the Greek Gnostics, she is the mother of the seven sons : the "Angels 
of the Face," of the "Deep," or the "Great Green One" of the 
"Book of the Dead" Says the Bode of Dzyan (Knowledge through 
meditation) — 

" The great mother lay with ^, and the \ , and the n* Ihe second 
I and the ^•*® in her bosom, ready to bring them forth, the valiant sons 
of the D A I I (^^ 4,320,000, the Cycle) whose two elders are the Q 
and the • (Point)/' 

At the beginning of every cycle of 4,320,000, the Seven (or, as some 
nations had it, eight) great gods, descended to establish the new order 
of things and give the impetus to the new cycle. That eighth god was 
the tmifying Circle or Locos, separated and made distinct from its 
host, in exoteric dogma, just as the three divine hypostases of the 
ancient Greeks are now considered in the Churches as three distinct 
personae. " The Mighty Ones perform their great works, and leave 
behind them everlasting monuments to commemorate their visit, every 
time they penetrate within our mayavic veil (atmosphere)," says a 

619. Diofenet l^ertiat in Vii, Pyikag, the PMse,** tnd In Hebrew ^M«^^q 

620. 31415, or y. The syntheiie, or the .^.^7 
Host unified in the Logos and die Point "who U (like onto, or the Mae) m God"* 
called in Roman Catholidm die "Angel of — tbe nanlfefted fcpfcacn ta ti oa. 



<>• ' ' 






ANTIQUITY OF THIS PYRAMIDS 435 

Commentary.*** Thus we are taught that the great Pyramids were 
built under their direct supervision, "when Dhruva [the then Pole- 
star] was at his lowest culmination, and the Krittikas [Pleiades] 
looked over his head [were on the same meridian but above] to watch 
the work of the giants." Thus, as the first Pyramids were built at the 
beginning of a Sidereal year, under Dhruva (Alpha Polaris), it must 
^ iiave been over 31,000 years (31,105) ago. Bunsen was right in ad- 
mitting for Egypt an antiquity of over 21,000 years, but this con- 
cession hardly exhausts truth and fact in this question. The author of 
The Natural Genesis writes : 

The stories told by Egyptian priests and others of time-keeping in Egypt, are 
now beginning to look less like lies in the sight of all who have escaped from 
biblical bondage. Inscriptions have lately been found at Sakkarah, making 
mention of two Sothiac cycles . . . festered at that time, now some 6000 
jrears ago. Thus when Herodotus was in Egypt, the Egyptians had — as now 
known — observed at least five different Sothiac cycles of 1461 years. The 
priests informed the Greek inquirer that time had been reckoned by them for 
so long that the sun had twice risen where it then set, and twice set where it 
then arose. This . . . can only be realized as a fact in nature by means of 
two cycles of Precession, or a period of 51,736 years.*" 



n 



Mor Isaac*** shows the ancient Syrians defining their world of the 
Rulers " and " active gods " in the same way as the Chaldaeans. 
The lowest world was the Sublunary — our own — watched by the 
"Angels " of the first or lower order ; the one that came next in rank, 
was Mercury, ruled by the "Archangels '' ; then came Venus, whose 
gods were the Principalities; the fourth was that of the Sun, the 
domain and region of the highest and mightiest gods of our system, 
the solar gods of all nations ; the fifth was Mars, ruled by the " Vir- 
tues"; the sixth — that of Bel or Jupiter — was governed by the 
Dominions; the seventh — the world of Saturn — by the Thrones. 
These are the worlds of form. Above come the four higher ones, 
making seven again, since the three highest are " unmentionable and 
unpronounceable." The eighth, composed of 1122 stars, is the domain 
of the Cherubs; the ninth, belonging to the walking and numberless 
stars on accotmt of their distance, has the seraphs ; as to the tenth — 
Kircher, quoting Mor Isaac, says that it is composed "of invisible 
stars that could be taken, they said, for clouds — so massed are they 
in the zone that we call Via Straminis, the Milky Way"; and he 

621. Appearing at the begimtiiif of Cy- — meaaure of, and UHm — haavana, 

dca, aa alao of ereiT aidereal year (of 25,368 622. VoL IL P* 918' But trr In our Book 

Teara) therefore the Kabekoi or Kabarim Ih " Cntonotoor 00 tm« BalNHANi/' 

rccehred their name in Chaldaea, aa it 62J. Sea Kircher'a 0«dipU4, Vol, II, 

meana die meatnrts of Heaven, from Kab p. 425. 



436 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

hastens to explain that " these are the stars of Lucifer, engulfed widi 
him in his terrible shipwreck." That which ccmies after and beyond 
the tenth world (our Quaternary, or the ArUpa world), the Syrians 
could not tell. ''All they knew was that it is there that b^;ins the vast 
and incomprehensible ocean of the infinite, the abode of the true div- 
inity without boundary or end." 

Champollion shows the same belief among the Egyptians. Hermes 
having spoken of the Father-Mother and Son, whose spirit (collect- 
ively the DIVINE fiat) shapes the Universe, says: — "Seven Agents 
(mediums) were also formed, to contain the material (or manifested) 
worlds, within their respective circles and the action of these agents 
was named destiny." He further enumerates seven and ten and twelve 
orders, which would take too long to detail here. 

As the Rig Vidhana together with the Brahmdnda Purana and 
all such works, whether describing the magic efficacy of the Rig-Vedic 
Mantras or the future Kalpas, are declared by Dr. Weber and others to 
be modem compilations " belonging probably only to the time of the 
Puranas," it is useless to refer the reader to their mystic explanations ; 
and one may as well quote simply from the archaic books utterly un- 
known to the Orientalists. These works explain that which so puzzles 
the scholars, namely that the Saptarshi, the " mind-bom sons " of 
Brahma, are referred to in the Satapatha Brahmana under one set 
of names ; in the Mahdbharata under another set ; and that the V&yu 
Purana makes even nine instead of seven Rishis, by adding the names 
of Bhrigu and Daksha to the list But the same occurs in every exoteric 
Scripture. The secret doctrine gives a long genealogy of Rishis, but 
separates them into many classes. Like the Gods of the Egyptians, who 
were divided into seven, and even twelve, classes, so are the Indian 
Rishis in their Hierarchies. The first -three groups are the Divine, the 
Cosmical and the Sub-lunary. Then come the Solar Gods of our 
system, the Planetary, the Sub-Mundane, and the purely human — the 
heroes and the Manushi. 

At present, however, we are only concerned with the ^r^-cosmic, 
divine gods, the Prajapati or the " Seven Builders." This group is 
found unmistakably in every Cosmogony. Owing to the loss of Egyp- 
tian archaic documents — since, according to M. Maspero, " the mater- 
ials and historical data on hand to study the history of the religious 
evolution in Egypt are neither complete nor very often intelligible " 
— in order to have the statements brought forward from the Secret 
Doctrine corroborated partially and indirectly, the ancient hymns and 
inscriptions on the tombs must be appealed to. One such, at any 
rate, shows that Osiris was, like Brahma-Prajapati, Adam Kadmon, 
Ormazd, and so many other Logoi, the chief and synthesis of the 



COSMIC GODS 437 



group of " Creators ' or Builders. Before Osiris became the " One " 
and the highest god of Egypt he was worshiped at Abydos as the 
head or leader of the Heavenly Host of the Builders belonging to the 
higher of the three orders. The hymn engraved on the votive stela 
of a tomb from Abydos (3rd register) addresses Osiris thus: 

Salutations to thee, Osiris, elder son of Sib; thou the greatest over the six 
gods issued from the goddess Nu (primordial Water), thou the great favorite 
of thy father Ra; father of fathers. King of Duration, master in the eternity 
. . . who, as soon as these issued from thy mother's bosom, gathered all the 
crowns and attached the Uraeus (serpent or naja) •^ on thy head; multiform 
god, whose name is unknown and who has many names in towns and provinces. 

Coming out from the primordial water crowned with the uraeus, which 
is the serpent emblem of (^smic fire, and himself the seventh over the 
six primary gods issued from Father-Mother, Nu and Nut (the sky), 
who can Osiris be, but the chief Prajapati, the chief SepWroth, the 
chief Amshaspend-Ormazd ! That this latter solar and cosmic god 
stood, in the beginning of religious evolution, in the same position as 
the archangel "whose name was secret," is certain. This Archangel 
was the representative on earth of the Hidden Jewish God, Michael, in 
short : it is his " Face " that is said to have gone before the Jews, like a 
" Pillar of Fire." Bumouf says, " The seven Amshaspends, who are 
most assuredly our archangels, designate also the personifications of 
the divine Virtues." •"^ And these archangels, therefore, are as " cer- 
tainly " the Saptarshi of the Hindus, though it is next to impossible 
to class each with its pagan prototype and parallel, since, as in the 
case of Osiris, they have all so "many names in towns and pro- 
vinces." Some of the most important, however, will be shown in their 
order. 

One thing is thus undeniably proven. The more one studies their 
Hierarchies and finds out their identity, the more proofs one acquires 
that there is not one of the past and present personal gods, known to 
us from the earliest days of History, that does not belong to the third 
stage of Cosmic manifestation. In every religion we find the concealed 
deity forming the ground work ; then the ray therefrom, that falls into 
primordial Cosmic matter (first manifestation) ; then the androgyne 
result, the dual Male and Female abstract Force, personified {second 
stage) ; this separates itself finally, in the third, into seven Forces, 
called the creative Powers by all the ancient Religions, and the 

624. This EgyptUn word Naja reminds are all crowned with, and connected with 
one a good deal of the Indian Niga, the N&gas — a sign of their cyclic and cosmic 
Serpent-God. Brahmi and Siva and Vishna character. 

625. Comment on tkt Yagna, p. 174. 



438 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

" Virtues of God " by the Christians. The later explanation and meta- 
physical abstract qualifications have never prevented the Roman and 
Greek Churches from worshiping these " Virtues " under the person- 
ifications and distinct names of the seven Archangels. In the Book of 
Druschim^*^ in the Talmud, a distinction between these groups is 
given which is the correct Kabalistic explanation. It says: 

There are three groups (or orders) of SepfUroth. Ist The Sephiroth called 
"the divine attributes" (abstract). 2nd. The physical or sidereal Sephiroth 
(personal) — one group of seven, the other of ten, 3rd. The metaphsrsical 
Sephiroth, or periphrasis of Jehovah, who are the first three Sephiroth (Kether, 
Chochmah and Binah), the rest of the seven being the (personal) seven spirits 
of the Presence [also of the planets]. 

The same division has to be applied to the primary, secondary and 
tertiary evolution of gods in every theogony, if one wishes to translate 
the meaning esoterically. We must not confuse the purely metaphysical 
personifications of the abstract attributes of Deity, with their reflection 
— the sidereal gods. This reflection, however, is in reality the objective 
expression of the abstraction : living Entities and the models formed on 
that divine prototype. Moreover, the three metaphysical Sephiroth or 
'' the periphrasis of Jehovah " are not Jehovah ; it is the latter himself 
with the additional titles of Adonai, Elohim, Sabbaoth, and the numer- 
ous names lavished on him, who is the periphrasis of the Shaddai, ^3?* 
the Omnipotent The name is a circumlocution, indeed, a too abund- 
ant flgure of Jewish rhetoric, and has always been denounced by the 
Occultists. To the Jewish Kabalists, and even the Christian Aldhcm- 
ists and Rosicrucians, Jehovah was a convenient screen, unified by the 
folding of its many flaps, and adopted as a substitute: one name of 
an individual Sephiroth being as good as another name, for those 
who had the secret. The Tetragrammaton, the Ineffable, the sidereal 
" Sum Total," was invented for no other purpose than to mislead the 
profane and to symbolize life and generation.**^ The real secret and 
unpronounceable name — "the word that is no word" — has to be 
sought in the seven names of the first seven emanations, or the " Sons 

626, Page 59, Itt Tr§aHt$, H 1 M ^ YHVH, the Tetncramaatom and 

627. Saj* the trtnalator of ATicebron'f ^^^^ *>»« complete lymbolt of its 



" Qabholah " (Mr. lauc Myer. ix. ■., of ^ 7^ ^ ^ ^^^^ *»' **• ^ne««Me 

Name betng always applied to tkt Sis ' 



PWUdelphla) of this "Sum Total -: " The _ . ^. , ^ , ^. ,. ^ 

/ «.\- . /v jx * n- u *^ '*♦ ****' together th4 Seven rcmaiidiw 

letter of Aether ia i ^odW B.nah n Sephiroth.- ... Thn. the Tetrag^^^lS^ 

(Heh), together YaH, the feminine Name; j, holy only in ita ahatract ayntfaeaiaL Aa 

the third letter, that of 'Hokhmah, ia « quaternary containing the lower Seven 

^ (Van), making together, ^ n « ^^HV of Sephiroth, it is phallic 



INCR^DIBI^E, BUT TRUE 



439 



of the Fire," in the secret Scriptures of all the great nations, and even 
in the Zohar, the Kabalistic lore of that smallest of all, the Jewish. 
This word, composed of seven letters in each tongue, is found embodied 
in the architectural remains of every grand building in the world ; from 
the Cyclopean remains on Easter Island (part of a continent buried 
under the seas nearer four million years ago*'* than 20,000) down to 
the earliest Egyptian pyramids. 

We shall have to enter more fully upon this subject, and bring 
practical illustrations to prove the statements made in the text. 

For the present it is sufficient to show, by a few instances, the truth 
of what was asserted at the beginning of this Monograph, namely, that 
no Cosmogony, the world over, with the sole exception of the Christian, 
has ever attributed to the One Highest cause, the universal Deific 
Principle, the immediate creation of our Earth, man, or an)rthing con- 
nected with these. This statement holds as good for the Hebrew or 
Chaldaean Kabala as it does for Genesis, had the latter been ever 
thoroughly understood, and — what is still more important — correctly 
translated.'** Everywhere there is either a WGOS — a '' Light shining 



628. The ftatement will, of course, be 
found preposterous and absurd, and dmply 
laughed at But if one belieres in the final 
submersion of Atlantis 850,000 years ago, as 
tao^t in "Esoteric Buddhism" (the gradual 
first sinking having begun during the Eocene 
age), one has to accept the statement for the 
•o-called Lemuria, the continent of the Third 
Root Race, first nearly destroyed by combus* 
tion, and then submerged. This is what 
the Commentary says: "The first earth 
having been purified by the forty-nine fires, 
her people, bom of Fire and Water, could 
not die . . . etc.; the Second Earth (with 
its race) disappeared as vapor vanishes in 
the air ... the Third Earth had everything 
consumed on it after the ssparaHon, and 
went down into the lower Deep (the Ocean). 
This was twics eighty-two cyclic years ago." 
Now a cyclic year is what we call a sidereal 
year, and is founded on the precession of 
the equinoxes, or 25,868 years each, and this 
is equal, therefore, in all to 4,242,352 years. 
More details will be found in the text of 
Book IL Meanwhile, this doctrine is em> 
bodied in the "Kings of Edom." 

629. The same reserve is found in the 
Talmud and in every national system of re- 



ligion whether monotheistic or exoterically 
polytheisticaL From the superb religious 
poem by the Kabalist Rabbi Solomon Ben 
(Sabirol in the Kether Malchuth, we select 
a few definitions given in the prayers of 
Kippur. ..." Thou art one, the beginning 
of all numbers, and the foundation of all 
edifices; Thou art One, and in the secret 
of Thy unity the wisest of men are lost, 
because they know it not. Thou art one, 
and Thy Unity is never diminished, never 
extended, and cannot be changed. Thou art 
one, but not as an element of numeration; 
for Thy Unity admits not of multiplication, 
change or form. Thou art existent; but the 
understanding and vision of mortals cannot 
attain to thy existence, nor determine for 
thee the Where, the How, and the Why. 
Thou art Existent, but in thyself alone, there 
being none other that can exist with thee. 
Thou art Existent, before all time and with- 
out Place. Thou art Existent, and thy exist- 
ence is so profotmd and secret that none can 
penetrate and discover thy secrecy. Thou 
art Living, but within no time that can be 
fixed or known; Thou art Living, but not 
by a spirit or a soul, for Thou art thyself, 
THS soui« oy ALL souu," etc., etc There 



432 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

Sound, and Ether, showing how well-informed were the ancients both 
in physical science (as now known to the modems), and as to the 
birtii of that science in the Spiritual and Astral spheres. 



Our old writers said that Vdch is of four kinds . . . pard, PiUyanH, 
dhyamd, vaikhari, (A statement found in the Rig-Veda and the Upanishads.) 
. . . Vaikhari Vach is what we utter. [It is sound, speech, that again which 
becomes comprehensive and objective to one of our physical senses and may be 
brought under the laws of perception. Hence;] . . . Every kind of VaikhaH 
Vdch exists in its Madhyamd . . . PaJyantt and ultimately in its Pard form. 
. . . The reason why this Pranava*** is called Vach is this, that these four 
principles of the great Kosmos correspond to these four forms of Vach. . . . 
The whole Kosmos in its objective form is Vaikhari Vach; the light of the 
Logos is the madhyamd form; and the Logos itself the paJyanti form; while 
Parabrahmam is the pard [beyond the noumenon of all Noumena] aspect of that 
Vach.~ 

Thus Vach, Shekinah, or the " music of the spheres " of Pythagoras, 
are one, if we take for our example instances in the three most (appar- 
ently) dissimilar religious philosophies in the world — the Hindu, the 
Greek and the Chaldaean Hebrew. These personations and allegories 
may be viewed under four (chief) and three (lesser) aspects or seven 
in all, as in Esotericism. The pard form is the ever subjective and 
latent Light and Sound, which exist eternally in the bosom of the 
INCOGNIZABLE; when transferred into the ideation of the Logos, or its 
latent light, it is called paiyanti, and when it becomes that light ex- 
pressed, it is tnadhyamd. 

Now the Kabala gives the definition thus : " There are three kinds 
of light, and that (fourth) which interpenetrates the others; (1) the 
clear and the penetrating, the objective light, (2) the reflected light, and 
(3) the abstract light." The ten Sephiroth, the three and the Seven, arc 
called in the Kabala the 10 words, d-brim (Dabarim), the numbers 
and the Emanations of the heavenly light, which is both Adam Kadmon 
and Sephira, or (Brahma) Prajapati-Vach. Light, Sound, Number, arc 
the three factors of creation in the Kabala. Parabrahmam cannot be 
known except through the luminous Point (the Locos), which knows 
not Parabrahmam but only MOlaprakriti. Similarly Adam Kadmon 
knew only Shekinah, though he was the vehicle of Ain-Soph. And, as 
Adam Kadmon, he is in the esoteric interpretation the total of the num- 
ber ten, the Sephiroth (himself a trinity, or the three attributes of the 

613. Pranava, tike Om, is a mxttic term arc pronounced with breath tttppmaed. See 

pronounced by the VogU during meditation; Manm II, 76-81, and Mit6ksharA ccmtm^mtimg 

of the terms called, according to exoteric on th€ YAjHavalkyaSmriSi, l, 23. But the 

Commentators, Vydhritis, or " Offi, Bhilr, esoteric explanation goes a great deal 

Bkuva, Sxfor " (Om, earth, sky. heaven) — further. 
Pranava is the most sacred perhapa. They 614. Notts ou tkt Bkagovad-GUi, 



THE PYTHAGOREAN IDEA 433 

incognizable Deity in One).'^' " When the Heavenly man (or Logos) 
first assumed the form of the Crown*** (Kether) and identified himself 
with Sephira, he caused seven splendid lights to emanate from it (the 
Crown)/' which made in their totality ten; so the Brahma- Prajapati, 
once he became separated from, yet identical with Vach, caused the 
seven Rishis, the seven Manus or Prajapatis to issue from that crown. 
In Exotericism one will always find 10 and 7, of either Sephiroth or 
Prajapati ; in Esoteric rendering always 3 and 7, which y\t\A also 10. 
Only when divided in the manifested sphere into 3 and 7, they form 

yVjt the androgyne, and ^H, or the figure X manifested and dif- 
ferentiated. 

This will help the student to understand why Pythagoras esteemed the 
Deity (the Logos) to be the center of unity and " Source of Harmony." 
We say this Deity was the Logos, not the monad that dwelleth in 
Solitude and Silence, because Pythagoras taught that unity being in- 
divisible is no number. And this is also why it was required of the 
candidate, who applied for admittance into Us school, that he should 
have already studied as a preliminary step, the Sciences of Arithmetic, 
Astronomy, (Jeometry and Music, held as the four divisions of Mathe- 
matics.*^^ Again, this explains why the Pythagoreans asserted that the 
doctrine of Numbers — the chief of all in Esotericism — had been re- 
vealed to man by the celestial deities ; that the world had been called 
forth out of Chaos by Sound or Harmony, and constructed according 

the principles of musical proportion; that the seven planets which 
rule the destiny of mortals have a harmonious motion " and intervals 
corresponding to musical diastemes, rendering various sounds, so per- 
fectly consonant, that they produce the sweetest melody, which is in- 
audible to us, only by reason of the greatness of the sotmd, which our 
ears are incapable of receiving." •^^ 

In the Pythagorean Theogony the hierarchies of the heavenly Host 
and Gods were numbered and expressed numerically. Pythagoras had 
studied Esoteric Science in India; therefore we find his pupils sa3ring: 

The monad (the manifested one) is the principle of all things. From the 
Monad and the indeterminate duad (Chaos), numbers; from numbers. Points; 

615. It is this trinity that if meant by 616. Chaldaeati Book of Number*. In 

"the three steps of Vishnu"; which means: the current KabaUt the name Jehovah re- 

(Vishnu beinff considered as the Infinite in places Adam Kadmon. 
exotericism) — that from the Parabrahm is* 

sued Mdlaprakriti, Purusha (the Logos), and 617. Justin Martyr tells us that owing 

Prakriti: the four forms (with itself, the to his ignorance of these four sciences, be 

synthesis) of Vich. And in the Kabala — was rejected by the Pythagoreans as a 

Ain-Soph, Sbeldnah, Adam Kadmon and Se- candidate for admission into their school, 
phira, the four — or the three emanations 

being distinct — yet ons. 618. Onsorinns. 



442 



THE SECBET DOCTRINE 



ally the Dove, are " the sacred animals " of the Western Bible, the first 
three being found grouped round the Evangelists ; and the fourth (the 
human face) is a Seraph, i. e,, a fiery serpent, the Gnostic Agathodaimon 
probably.*** As explained, the " sacred animals " and the Flames or 
" Sparks " within the " Holy Four " refer to the prototypes of ail that 
is found in the Universe in the Diznne Thought, in the Root, which 
is the perfect cube, or the foundation of the Kosmos collectively and 
individually. They have all an occult reference to primordial Cosmic 
forms and its first concretions, work, and evolution. 

In the earliest Hindu exoteric cosmogonies, it is not even the Demi- 
urge who creates. For it is said in one of the Puranas that : " The great 
Architect of the World gives the first impulse to the rotatory motion 
of our planetary system by stepping in turn over each planet and body." 
It is this action "that causes each sphere to turn around itself, and 
all around the Sun." After which action, " it is the Brahm&ndika, the 
Solar and Lunar Pitris (the Dhyani-Chohans), who take charge of 
their respective spheres (earths and planets), to the end of the Kalpa.'' 
The Creators are the Rishis; most of whom are credited with the 
authorship of the mantras or Hymns of the Rig Veda. They arc some- 
times seven, sometimes ten, when they become prajdpati, the " Lord of 
Beings " ; then they rebecome the seven and the fourteen Manus, as the 
representatives of the seven and fourteen cycles of Existence (" Days 
of Brahma ") ; thus answering to the seven Aeons, when at the end of 
the first stage of Evolution they are transformed into the seven stellar 
Rishis, the Saptarshis; while their human doubles appear as heroes, 
Kings and Sages on this earth. 



when thon thalt ha.rt thirty tkrtt years of 
age thou wilt comprehend me." So with the 
mystery of the tortoise. Rejoicing over the 
poetry of Biblicml metaphors, associating 
with the name of JehoTah, "incandescent 
stones,** "sacred animals," etc, and quoting 
from the Bible de Vence iVol. XIX, p. 318) 
a French pious writer says: " Indeed all of 
them are Blohim tike their God; for, these 
Angels assume, through a holy usurpation, 
the very divine name of Jehorah each tkne 
they represent him.*' {Pneumtatotogie, Vol. 
It, p. 294). No one erer doubted that the 
MAMS mutt have been assumed, when under 
the guise of the Infinite, One Incognixable, 
the iialachim (messengers) descended to eat 
and drink witii men. But if the Elohlm 
(and even lower Beings), assuming the god* 
name, were and are still worshiped, why 
should the same Elohlm be called devils. 



when i4>pearing under the names of other 
CkKb? 

634. The choice is curious, and shows 
how paradoxical were the first Chriatians in 
their selections. For why should tbcy hare 
chosen these symbols of Egyptian paganism, 
when the eagle is never mentiooed in the 
New Testament save once, when Jesus refcn 
to it as a carrion eater? (Jfall.xxiT.3S); 
and in the Old Testament it is called ••»- 
clean; that the Lion is made a point of 
comparison with Satan, both roaring for men 
to devour; and the oxen are driven out of 
the Temple. On the other hand the Serpent, 
brought as an exemplar of wisdom to follow, 
is now regarded as the symbol of the Devfl. 
The esoteric pearl of Christ's religioa de- 
graded into Christian theology, may indeed 
be said to have chosen a strange and unfit- 
ting shell to be bom in and evolved 



THE MYSTERY OF BI<ACKNESS 443 

The Esoteric doctrine of the East having thus furnished and struck 
the key-note — which is as scientific as it is philosophical and poetical, 
as may be seen, under its allegorical garb — every nation has followed 
its lead. It is from the exoteric religions that we have to dig out the 
root-idea before we turn to esoteric truths, lest the latter should be 
rejected. Furthermore, every symbol, — in every national religion — 
may be read esoterically, and the proof furnished for its being correctly 
read by transliterating it into its corresponding numerals and geometri- 
cal forms — by the extraordinary agreement of all — however much the 
glyphs and symbols may vary among themselves. For in the origin 
those s3mibols were all identical. Take, for instance, the opening sen- 
tences in various cosmogonies : in every case it is either a circle, an egg, 
or a head. Darkness is always associated with this first symbol and 
surrounds it, — as shown in the Hindu, the Egyptian, the Chaldaeo- 
Hebrew and even the Scandinavian systems i — hence black ravens, black 
doves, black waters and even black flames ; the seventh tongue of Agni, 
the fire-god being called "KaK," "the black," as it was a black flicker- 
ing flame. Two bUick doves flew from Egypt and settling on the oaks 
of Ekxlona, gave their names to the Grecian gods. Noah lets out a black 
raven after the deluge, which is a symbol for the Cosmic pralaya, after 
which began the real creation or evolution of our earth and humanity. 
Odin's black ravens fluttered around the Goddess Saga and " whispered 
to her of the past and of the future." What is the real meaning of all 
those black birds? They are all connected with the primeval wisdom, 
which flows out of the pre-cosmic Source of all, symbolized by the 
Head, the Circle, the Egg ; and they all have an identical meaning and 
relate to the primordial Archetypal man (Adam Kadmon) the creative 
origin of all things, which is composed of the Host of Cosmic Powers 
— the creative Dhyan-Chohans, beyond which all is darkness. 

Let us inquire of the wisdom of the Kabala — even veiled and 
distorted as it now is, — to explain in its numerical language an approx- 
imate meaning, at least of the word " raven." This is its number value 
as given in the Source of Measures. 

The term Raven is used but once, and taken as eth-h'orebv myrf^nK, = 678^ 
or 113X6; while the Dove is mentioned five times. Its value is 71, and 
71 X 5 z= 355. Six diameters, or the raven, crossing, would divide the circum- 
ference of a circle of 355 into 12 parts or compartments; and 355 subdivided 
for each unit by 6, would equal 213-0, or the head ["beginning"] in the first 
verse of Genesis. This divided or subdivided, after the same fashion, by 2, or 
the 355 by 12, would give 213-2, or the word B'rash, tt^HT:n» or the first word 
of Genesis, with its prepositional prefix, sig^ifsring the same concreted general 
form astronomically with the one here intended*** 

634a. Page 249. 



444 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

Now the secret reading of the first verse of Genesis being : " In Rash 
(B'rash) or head, developed gods, the Heavens and the Earth" — it 
is easy to comprehend the esoteric meaning of the raven, once that the 
like meaning of the Flood (or Noah's Deluge) is ascertained. What- 
ever the many other meanings of this emblematical allegory may be, its 
chief meaning is that of a new cycle and a new Round (our Fourth 
Round)."* The "Raven," or the Eth-H'Orebv, yields the same 
numerical value as the " Head," and returned not to the ark, while 
the dove returned, carrying the olive-branch, when Noah, the new man 
of the new Race (whose protot)rpe is Vaivasvata Manu), prepared to 
leave the ark, the womb (or Argha) of terrestrial nature, is the 
symbol of the purely spiritual, sexless and androgyne man of the first 
three Races, who vanished from earth for ever. Numerically Jehovah, 
Adam, Noah, are one in the Kabala : at best, then, it is Deity descend- 
ing on to Ararat (later on Sinai), to incarnate in man his image, 
through the natural process, henceforth: the mother's womb, whose 
symbols are the ark, the mount (Sinai), etc., in Genesis. The Jewish 
allegory is at once astronomical, and purely physiological rather than 
anthropomorphic. 

And here lies the abyss between the two systems (Aryan and Sem- 
itic), though built on the same foundation. As shown by an expounder 
of the Kabala, " the basic idea underlying the philosophy of the He- 
brews was that (jod contained all things within himself and that man 
was his image; man, including woman (as Androgynes)"; and that 
"geometry and numbers (and measures applicable to astronomy) are 
contained in the terms man and woman; and the apparent incongruity 
of such a mode was eliminated by showing the connexion of man and 
woman with a particular system of ntmibers and measures and geo- 
metry, by the parturient time-periods, which furnished the connecting 
link between the terms and the facts shown, and perfected the mode 
used." It is argued that, the primal cause being absolutely incognizable, 
" the symbol of its first comprehensible manifestation was the concep- 
tion of a circle with its diameter line, so as at once to carry the idea of 
geometry, phallicism, and astronomy " ; and this was finally applied to 
the " signification of simply human generative organs. "••• Hence the 
whole cycle of events from Adam and the Patriarchs down to Noah 



635. Bryant is right in saying *' Druid terically, was the new race of 
Bardism says of Noah that when he came from woman after the aeparation of the 
oat of the ark (the Mrth of a new cycle), e«, which is tkt secondary meaning of tlw 
after a stay therein of a year and a day, allegory: its primary meaning being the be- 
that 364-f 1=365 days, he was congratulated ginning of the Fourth Round, or the 
by Neptune upon his birth from the wa- Creation. 

ters of the Flood, who wished him a happy 636. Unpublithed MS, (But see Si 

Sew Year." The " Year," or cycle, eso- of Measure*,) 



COD IS OUR HIGHER SELP 445 

is made to apply to phallic and astronomical uses, the one regulating 
the other, as the lunar periods, for instance. Hence, too, their genesis 
begins after their coming out of the Ark, and the close of the flood — 
at the Fourth Race. With the Aryan people it is different. 

Eastern Esotericism has never degraded the One Infinite Deity, the 
container of all things, to such uses ; and this is shown by the absence 
of Brahma from the ^i^ Veda and the modest positions occupied there- 
in by Rudra and Vishnu, who became the powerful and great Gods, 
the " Infinites " of the exoteric creeds, ages later. But even they, 
" Creators " as the three may be, are not the direct creators and " fore- 
fathers of men." The latter are shown occupying a still lower scale, 
and are called Prajapatis, the Pitris (our lunar ancestors), etc., etc., 
— never the "One Infinite God." Esoteric philosophy shows only 
physical man as created in the image of the Deity; but the latter is 
but " the minor gods." It is the Higher-SeW, the real Eco who alone 
is divine and god. 



§ XIII 
THE SEVEN CREATIONS 

" There was neither day nor night, nor sky nor earth, nor darkncsH 
nor light, nor any other thing save only one, unapprehensible by in- 
tellect, or THAT which is Brahma and Pums (Spirit) and PnuUiana 
(crude matter)";*" or literally: "One Pradhanika Brahma Spirit: 
THAT was." The '* Pradhanika Brahma Spirit " is Mulaprakriti and 
ParabrahmanL 

In Vishnu Purana**^ Parasara says to Maitreya, his pupil :— " I 
have thus explained to you, excellent Muni, six crc^iums , , , the 
creation of the Arvaksrotas beings was the seventh, ami wan that of 
man." Then he proceeds to speak of two additional and very rny)*f<rri- 
ous creations variously interpreted by the commentatr>r», 

Origcn, commenting upon the books written by 0:hus, hi% r/f;|xynftit 
— books which were all dcstrojed by the prudent Church Father* 
evidently answers the objections of hi» cf/nirzAicUjr and rcvraU hi% 
system at the same time. This was evidently septenary, Kut bin iU^'O 
gony, the genesis of the stars or plaxHrtt. that of vy'jnd an'J 'olor, ;^)] 
found as an answer satire, and no bctttr. 0:\vi\, y^ju t^*', '* fUvrmn 
to exhibit his learning,^ speaks of a lad'W of crrat^/n with seven ffate$, 



637. Vtdm: " FULmm Fw^^mm C pm me mimrjr h «. *>7., I, r. 



446 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

and on the top of it the eighth — ever closed. The mysteries of the 
Persian Mithras, are explained and " musical reasons, moreover, are 
added." . . . And to these again he strives " to add a second explana- 
tion connected also with musical considerations," ••• — i, e., with the 
seven notes of the scale, the Seven Spirits of the Stars, etc., etc. 

Valentinus expatiates upon the power of the great Seven, who were 
called to bring forth this universe after Ar(r)hetos, or the Ineffable, 
whose name is composed of seven letters, had represented the first 
hebdomad. This name (Ar(r)hetos) is one to indicate the Sevenfold 
nature of the One (the logos). " The goddess Rhea," says Proldos,*" 
" is a Monad, Duad, and Heptad," comprehending in herself all the 
Titanidae, " who are seven." 

The Seven Creations are found in almost every Purana. They arc 
all preceded by what Wilson translates — " the indiscrete Principle," 
absolute Spirit independent of any relation with objects of sense. 
They are — (1) Mahattattva, the Universal Soul, Infinite Intellect, 
or Divine Mind; (2) BhUta or BhAtasarga, elemental creation, the 
first differentiation of Universal indiscrete Substance; (3) Indriya 
or Aindriyaka, organic evolution. "These three were the Prakrita 
creations, the developments of indiscrete nature preceded by indiscrete 
principle " ; (4) Mukhya, the fundamental creation of perceptible 
things, was that of inanimate bodies;**® (5) Tairyagyonya, or Tiryak- 
srotas, was that of animals; (6) Ordhvasrotas, or that of divin- 
ities*** ( ?) ; (7) Arvaksrotas, was that of man.*** 

This is the order given in the exoteric texts. According to esoteric 
teaching there are seven primary, and seven secondary "creations"; 
the former being the Forces self-evolving from the one causeless 
FORCE; the latter, showing the manifested Universe emanating from 
the already differentiated divine elements. 

Esoterically, as well as exoterically, all the above enumerated Crea- 
tions stand for the (7) periods of Evolution, whether after an "Age" 
or a " Day " of Brahma. This is the teaching par excellence of Occult 
Philosophy, which, however, never uses the term " creation," nor even 
that of evolution, "with regard to primary 'Creation'": but calls 
all such forces "the aspects of the Causeless Force." In the Bible 

638. Origeii, Comira Ctlsum, B. vi, chap. ing of the exprettioii "animals^ U tke gtrmt 
sodi of all animal lift induding msn. M«a is 

639. In Timatut, p. 121. called a taeriflcial animal, and aa animal 

640. The text aaja: ** And the fourth that ia the only one among animal crcatioa 
creation ia here the primary, for things im- who sacrifioea to the godai Hart^vtr, bj the 
movable are emphatically known as primary.** " sacred animals,*' the 12 signs of the aodiac 
iStt PiiMgdward Halt* CorrecHons,) are often meant in the sacred texts, as al- 

641. How can "dirinlties*' have been ere- ready stated. 

ated aftfr die animals? The esoteric mean- 642. Sgf yUknu PmHma. 



THE ORDER OF THE EV0I<UTI0N 



447 



the seven periods are dwarfed into tht six days of creation and the 
seventh day of rest, and the Westerns adhere to the letter. In the 
Hindu philosophy, when the active Creator has produced the world 
of gods, the germs of all the undifferentiated elements and the rudi- 
ments of future senses (the world of noumena, in short), the Universe 
remains unaltered for a " Day of Brahma," a period of 4,320,000,000 
years. This is the seventh passive period or the " Sabbath day " of 
Eastern philosophy, that follows six periods of active evolution. In 
the Satapatha Brahmana "Brahma" (neuter), the absolute Cause of 
all Causes, radiates the gods. Having radiated the gods (through its 
inherent nature) the work is interrupted. In the 1st Book of Manu 
it is said, "At the expiration of each night (prala)ra) Brahma, having 
been asleep, awakes, and, through the sole energy of the motion, causes 
to emanate from itself the spirit, which in its essence is, and yet is not." 

In the Sepher Jetzirah, the Kabalistic Book of Creation, the author 
has evidently repeated the words of Manu. In it the Divine Substance 
is represented as having alone existed from the eternity, boundless and 
absolute ; and as having emitted from itself the Spirit. " One is the 
Spirit of the living God, blessed be his Name, who liveth for ever! 
Voice, Spirit, and Word, this is the Holy Spirit." •*• And this is the 
Kabalistic abstract Trinity, so unceremoniously anthropomorphized by 
the Fathers. From this triple one emanated the whole Kosmos. First 
from ONE emanated number Two, or Air, the creative element; and 
then number THREE, Water, proceeded from the air; Ether or Fire 
complete the mystic four, the Arba-il.*** In the Eastern doctrine Fire 
is the first Element — Ether, synthesizing the whole (since it contains 
all of them). 

In the Vishnu Purdna, the whole seven periods are given, and the 
progressive Evolution of " Spirit-Soul," and of the seven forms of 
matter (or principles) are shown. It is impossible to enumerate them 
in this work. The reader is asked to peruse one of the Puranas. 

R. Yehudah began, it is written: "Elohim said: Let there be a firmament, 
in the midst of waters. ... At the time that the Holy . . . created the world. 
He (they) created seven heavens Above. He created seven earths Below, seven 
seas, seven days, seven rivers, seven weeks, seven years, seven times, and 7000 
years that the world has been. ... the seventh of all the millennium. So 
here are seven earths Below, they are all inhabited except those which are above, 
and those . . . below. And . . . between each earth, a heaven (firmament) 
is spread out between each other. . . . And there are in them (these earths) 
creatures who look different from each other . . . but if you object and say 
that all the children of the world came out from Adam, it is not so. . . . 

643. Seph^ JgtMtrgk, chap. 1, Miihna IX. 644. Ibid. 



448 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

And the lower earths, where do they come from? They are from the cAumm of 
the earth, and from the heaven below, etc, etc*" 

Irenaeus is our witness (and a very unwilling one, too) that the 
Gnostics taught the same system, veiling very carefully the true esoteric 
meaning. This " veiling," however, is identical with that of the Vishnu 
Purana and others. Thus Irenaeus writes of the Marcosians : " They 
maintain that first of all the four elements, fire, water, earth and air, 
were produced after the image of the primary tetrad above, and that 
then if we add their operations, namely, heat, cold, dryness and moist- 
ure, an exact likeness of the ogdoad is presented." •*• 

Only this " likeness " and the ogdoad itself is a blind, just as in the 
seven creations of the Vishnu Purana to which two more are added 
of which the eighth, termed Anugraha, " possesses both the qualities of 
goodness and darkness," a Sankhyan more than a Puranic idea. For 
Irenaeus says again •^^ that 

they [the Gnostics] had a like eighth creation which was good and bad, divine 
and human. They affirm that man was formed on the eighth day. Sometimes 
they affirm that he was made on the sixth day, and at others on the eighth; 
unless, perchance, they mean that his earthly part was formed on the sixth day 
and his fleshly part [ ? ] on the eighth day ; these two being distinguished by 
them. 

They were so "distinguished," but not as Irenaeus gives it The 
Gnostics had a superior Hebdomad, and an inferior one, in Heaven; 
and a third terrestrial Hebdomad, on the plane of matter. Iao, the 
mystery god and the Regent of the Moon, as given in Origen's chart, 
was the chief of these superior "Seven Heavens," ^^* hence identical 
with the chief of the lunar Pitris, that name being given by them to 
the lunar Dhyan-Chohans. " They affirm that these seven heavens arc 
intelligent, and speak of them as being angels/' writes the same Iren- 
aeus; and adds that on this account they are termed Iao Hebdomas, 
while his mother was called " Ogdoas," because, as he explains, " she 
preserved the number of the first begotten and primary Ogdoad of the 
Pleromar •*• 

This " first begotten Ogdoad *' was (a) in theogony the second Logos 
(the manifested) because he was bom of the Seven-fold first Logos, 
hence he is the eighth on this manifested plane; and (6) in astrolatry, 
it was the Sun, Marttanda — the eighth son of Aditi, whom she rejects 
while preserving her Seven Sons, the planets. For the ancients have 
never regarded the Sun as a planet, but as a central and fixed Star. 

645. Qabbalak, P- 415-16, by I. Mrcr, 648. Superior to the Spirits or ** Hear- 
Philadelphia. ent*' of the EAith only. 

646. Bk. I, ch. xriL 

647. Bk. I, X3CX, 6. 649. Ihid., Bk. x, ▼. 2. 



THE SIX STthhAR GODS 449 

This, then, is the second Hebdomad bom of the Seven-rayed one, Agni, 
the Sun and what not, only not the seven planets, which are Surya's 
brothers, not his Sons. These Astral gods, whose chief with the Gnos- 
tics was Ildabaoth •^^^ (from Ilda "child," and Baoth "the egg"), the 
son of Sophia Achamoth, the daughter of Sophia (Wisdom), whose re- 
gion is the Pleroma, were his (Ildabaoth's) sons. He produces from 
himself these six stellar spirits : Jove (Jehovah), Sabaoth, Adonai, Blot, 
Ouraios, Astaphaios,*^^ and it is they who are the second, or inferior 
Hebdomad. As to the third, it is composed of the seven primeval men, 
the shadows of the lunar gods, projected by the first Hebdomad. In 
this the Gnostics did not, as seen, differ much from the esoteric doctrine 
except that they veiled it As to the charge made by Irenaeus, who was 
evidently ignorant of the true tenets of the " Heretics," with regard to 
man being created on the sixth day, and man being created on the 
eighth, this relates to the mysteries of the inner man. It will become 
comprehensible to the reader only after he has read Book II, and under- 
stood well the Anthropogenesis of the Esoteric doctrine. 

Ildabaoth is a copy of Manu. The latter boasts, " Oh, best of twice- 
born men I Know that I (Manu) am he, the creator of all this world, 
whom that male Viraj . . . spontaneously produced." ••* He first 
creates the ten lords of Being, the Prajapatis, who, as verse 36 says 
. . . " produce seven other Manus." •" Ildabaoth docs likewise : " I 
am Father and God, and there is no one above me," he exclaims. 
For which his mother coolly puts him down by saying, '' Do no lie, 
Ildabaoth, for the father of aill, the first man (Anthropos) is above 
thee, and so is Anthropos, the son of Anthropos/' ♦** This is a good 
proof that there were three Logoi (besides the Seven bom of the 
First), one of these being the SoUnr Logos. And, again, who was that 
"Anthropos" himself, so much higher than Ildabaoth? The (jtUf^Xxc 
records alone can solve this riddle. In Pistis Sophia the four-vowclkd 
name lEov is in each case accompanied by the epithet of "* the iVirnal, 
or First man." This shows again that the gnrAis was Init an e^,h^i of 
our archaic doctrine. The names answering to Paral/rahm, to KrArn, 
and Manu, (the first ifMmig man; are cornp^/*.^ of on^-vcrw^I^d 
three-voweled and seven-vowcled sotinds. Mark^/*, wh^/v^ pK;>/v/;/r,/ 
was certainly more I*ythagorean than ar>-rh;ng t\^., •,;y^* of a r^y j*- 
tion to him of the seven hearers irnrAir.'g e^'M ^/r,*: row^! a% ♦K^/ yr'^ 
nounced the seven names of the ser^ ^ar.;^*::k; Y/.^zrr\/t%, 

When spirit has peraieated every rr.:n-rtit»t aV>m of *}^. uff^ prln- 



650. See imt V um t S t i , V<£. H, yo^ i^ m T^-tA*-^ h^m^t t*-^ 0^'^A^ 
65L See al» Ki^t C^^ia mmd ft^v K'.i I it 



99 



450 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

ciples of Kosmos, then the secondary creation, after the above-men- 
tioned period of rest, begins. 

"The creators (Elohim) outline in the second 'hour' the shape of 
man," says Rabbi Simeon.*" "There are twelve hours in the day, 
says the Mishna, "and it is during these that creation is accomplished. 
The " twelve hours of the day " are again the dwarfed copy, the faint, 
yet faithful, echo of primitive Wisdom. They are like the 12,000 div- 
ine years of the gods, a cyclic blind. Every " Day of Brahma " has 
14 Manus, which the Hebrew Kabalists, following, however, in this 
the Chaldaeans, have disguised into 12 "Hours."*** The Nuchthemeron 
of Apollonius of Tyana is the same thing. " The Dodecahedron lies 
concealed in the perfect Cube," say the Kabalists. The mystic meaning 
of this is, that the twelve great transformations of Spirit into matter 
(the 12,000 divine years) take place during the four great ages, or the 
first Mahayuga. Beginning with the metaphysical and the supra-human, 
it ends in the physical and purely htunan natures of Kosmos and man. 
Eastern philosophy can give the number of mortal years that run along 
the line of spiritual and physical evolutions of the seen and the unseen, 
if Western science fails to do so. 

Primary Creation is called the Creation of Light (Spirit) ; and the 
Secondary — that of Darkness (matter).**' Both are found in Genesis, 
chap, i, V. 2, and at the beginning of chap. ii. The first is the emana- 
tion of self -bom gods (Elohim) ; the second of physical nature. 

This is why it is said in the ZoAar; — "Oh, companions, companions^ 
man as emanation was both man and woman ; as well on the side of the 
Father as on the side of the Mother. And this is the sense of the 
words : — And Elohim spoke : ' Let there be Light and it was Light ! 
. . . And this is the ' two- fold man ! ' " Light moreover on our plane, 
is darkness in the higher spheres. 

"Man and woman on the side of the Father" (Spirit) refers to 
Primary Creation; and on the side of the Mother (matter) to the 
secondary. The two-fold man is Adam Kadmon, the male and female 
abstract prototype and the differentiated Elohim. Man proceeds from 
the Dhyan Chohan, and is a " Fallen Angel," a god in exile, as will be 
shown. 

In India these creations were described as follows : 

(I) Mahat-tattva creation — so-called because it was the primordial 
self-evolution of that which had to become Mahat — the "divine Mind, 
conscious and intelligent " ; esoterically, " the spirit of the Universal 

655. Tk4 Suchtktm^ron of tk4 H$brtwt, Gebirol and hli 7 bemTeot, 7 nrtht. etc 
65d. Eltewherc, however, the identity it 657. This rotut not be oonfoaed viA 

revealed. Set supra, the quotation from Jbo' prtcotmU " DAaxmat," the Divine au. 



MANY VERSIONS O? THE ONE TRUTH 451 

soul." • . . " Worthiest of ascetics, through its potency (the potency of 
that cause) ; every produced cause comes by its proper nature." •" 
" Seeing that the potencies of all beings are understood only through 
the knowledge of That (Brahma), which is beyond reasoning, creation, 
and the like, such potencies are referable to Brahma." That, then, 
precedes the manifestation. " The first was Mahat," says Linga Pu- 
rana; for the one (the That) is neither first nor last, but all. Exo- 
terically, however, this manifestation is the work of the " Supreme 
One " (a natural effect, rather, of an Eternal Cause) ; or, as the Com- 
mentator says, it might have been understood to mean that Brahma was 
then created (?), being identified with Mahat, active intelligence or 
the operating will of the Supreme. Esoteric philosophy renders it " the 
operating law," 

It is on the right comprehension of this tenet in the Brahmanas and 
Puranas that hangs, we believe, the apple of discord between the three 
Vedantin sects: the Advaita, Dvaita, and the Vi^ishtadvaitas. The 
first arguing rightly that Parabrahmam, having no relation, as the ab- 
solute all, to the manifested world — the Infinite having no connexion 
with the finite — can neither tvUI nor create; that, therefore, Brahma, 
Mahat, Isvara, or whatever name the creative power may be known by, 
creative gods and all, are simply an illusive aspect of Parabrahmam in 
the conception of the conceivers; while the other sects identify the 
impersonal Cause with the Creator, or Isvara. 

Mahat (or Maha-Buddhi) is, with the Vaishnavas, however, divine 
mind in active operation, or, as Anaxagoras has it, " an ordering and 
disposing mind, which was the cause of all things," — Now o Suucoa/mv 

Wilson saw at a glance the suggestive connexion between Mahat and 
the Phoenician Mot, or Mut, who was female with the Egjrptians — the 
Goddess Mut, the " Mother " — " which, like Mahat," he says, " was 
the first product of the mixture (?) of Spirit and matter, and the first 
rudiment of Creation : " " Ex connexione autem ejus spiritus prodidit 
Mot . . . From whose seed were created all living things " repeats 
Brucker*** — giving it a still more materialistic and anthropomorphic 
coloring. 

Nevertheless, the esoteric sense of the doctrine is seen through every 
exoteric sentence on the very face of the old Sanskrit texts that treat 
of primordial Creation. "The Supreme Soul, the all permeant (Sar- 
vaga) Substance of the World, having entered (been drawn) into mat- 
ter (prakriti) and Spirit (purusha), agitated the mutable and the im- 

658. Vishnu Purdna, Bk. i. 659. I, 240. 



452 



THE SECRET DOCTRINE 



mutable principles, the season of Creation (manvantara) having ar- 
rived." ••^ . . . 

Esoteric doctrine teaches that the Dhyan Chohans are the collective 
aggregate of divine Intelligence or primordial mind, and that the first 
Manus — the seven "mind-bom" Spiritual Intelligences — are iden- 
tical with the former. Hence the " Kwan-shi-yin " — "the golden 
Dragon in whom are the seven," of Stanza III — is the primordial 
Logos, or Brahma, the first manifested creative Power; and the 
Dhyani-Energies are the Manus, or ManU'SvdyanU>huva collectively. 
The direct connexion, moreover, between the " Manus " and " Mahat " 
is easy to see. Manu is from the root man, " to think " ; and thinking 
proceeds from the mind. It is, in Cosmogony, the pre-nebular period. 

(II) " The second Creation," " Bhuta," was of the rudimentaJ prin- 
ciples (Tanmatras), thence termed the elemental creation (Bh&ta^ 
sarga).^^^ It is the period of the first breath of the dififerentiation of 
the pre-Cosmic Elements or matter. BhUtSdi means literally " the origin 
of the Elements," and precedes Bhuta-sarga — the "creation" or diflFcr- 
entiation of those Elements in primordial "Akasa (Chaos or Vac- 
uity ).••* In the Vishnu Purdna it is said to proceed along, and be- 
long to, the triple aspect of Ahankara, translated Egotism, but meaning 
rather that untranslatable term the " I-am-ness," that which first issues 



660. The nout of the Greeks, which it 
(tpirittial or divine) mind, or menSp ** Ma- 
hat," operates upon matter in the same way; 
it "enters into" and ogitaUs it: 
" Spiritus intus alk, totamqtie infuaa per 
artus. 

Mens agitat mokm, et magno ae oorpore 
miicet." 
In the Phoenician Cosmogony, " Spirit mix- 
ing with its own principles gives rise to 
creation" also; (Brucktr, 1, 240); the Or^ 
phic triad shows an identical doctrine: for 
there Phanes (or Eros). Chaos, containing 
crude undiffgrentiated Cosmic matter, and 
ChroHOS (time), are the three co-operating 
principles, emanating from the Unknowable 
and concealed poin$, which produce the work 
of "Creation." And they are the Hindd 
Pnrusha (phanes). ProdhAna (chaos), and 
KAta (Chronos) or time. The good Profes- 
sor Wilson does not like the idea, aa no 
Christian dcrgjrman. however liberal, would. 
He remarks that '* aa preaently explained, 
the mixtitrt (of the Su^tmt Spirit or Soul) 
it no$ mtchanical; it is on infhtencg or efoct 
exerted upon intermediate agents which pro- 
duce effects." The sentence in Vishnu Pu- 
rdna : " As fragrance affects the mind from 
its proximity merely, and not from any im- 



mediate operation upon mind itself, so tlw 
Supreme influenced the elements of crtm- 
tion," the rererend and erudite SanskriCiaK 
correctly explains . . .: "As perfumes do 
not delight the mind by actual contact, bat 
by the impression they make upon the aenaa 
of smelling, which communicates it to the 
mind," adding: " The entrance of the 5»- 
Preme into spirit, aa well aa matter, is lems 
intelligible than the view elsewhere taken o€ 
it. aa the infusion of spirit, identified with 
the supreme, into Prakriti or matter ak»e.** 
He prefers the verse in Padma PurSna: " U« 
who is called the male (spirit) of Prakriti 
. . . that aame divine Vishnu entered iatp 
Prakriti" This "view" is certainly 
akin to the plastic character of certain 
in the Bible concerning the Patriarcha* 
aa Lot iCen. xix, 34-18) and even 
(iv. 1), and others of a still more anthropo- 
morphic nature. But it is just tlwt wki^ 
led Humanity to Phallicism, Christian reUc^ 
ion being honeycombed with it. from the first 
chapter of Genesis down to the ReveloH^m, 

661. All these sentences are quoted fro« 
VUhnu PurAna, Book I. ch. ii. 

662. Vishnu is both Bhdteia. ** Lord of 
the Elements, and all things," and Viivm^ipm. 
" Universal Substance or SonL" 



THE SEVEN CREATIONS 



453 



>y 



>» 



from " Mahat/' or divine mind ; the first shadowy outline of Self-hood, 
for "pure" Ahankara becomes "passionate" and finally "nidimental 
(initial) ; it is '* the origin of conscious as of all unconscious being, 
though the Esoteric school rejects the idea of anything being " uncon- 
scious " — save on this (our) plane of illusion and ignorance. At this 
stage of the Second Creation, the second hierarchy of the Manus ap- 
pear, the Dhyan Chohans or Devas, who are the origin of form (rupa) : 
the Chiiraiikhandinas (bright-crested) or the Rikshas — those Rishis 
who have become the informing souls of the seven stars (of the Great 
Bear).*^ In astronomical and Cosmogonical language this Creation 
relates to the first stage of Cosmic-life, the Fire-Mist Period after its 
Chaotic stage,*** when atoms issue from Laya. 

(Ill) The third (the Indriya) was the modified form of Ahankara, 
the conception of " I," (from "Aham" " I ") termed the organic Crea- 
tion, or creation of the senses (Aindriyaka) . "These three were the 
Prakrita creation, the (discrete) developments of indiscrete nature 
preceded by the indiscrete principle." " Preceded by," ought to be re- 
placed here with " beginning by," Buddhi ; for the latter is neither a 
discrete nor an indiscrete quantity, but partakes of the nature of both, 
in man as in Kosmos : a unit — a human monad on the plane of illus- 
ion — when once freed from the three forms of Ahankara and liber- 
ated from its terrestrial manas, Buddhi becomes truly a continued quan- 
tity, both in duration and extension, because eternal and immortal. 
Earlier it is stated, that the third Creation "abounding with the quality 
of goodness, is termed Ordhvasrotas " ; and a page or two further the 
Ordhvasrotas creation is referred to as "the sixth creation . . . that 
of the divinities."*** This shows plainly that earlier as well as later 
manvantaras have been purposely confused, to prevent the profane 



663. See ecmcerning their pott-tyPit, the 
Treatise written by Tritheniut (Agrippa't 
master, 16th cent). " Conoeminff the seven 
secondaries, or Spiritual Intelligences, who, 
after God, actuate the Universe;" gifving 
oat, besides secret cycles and several prophe- 
cies, certain facts and beliefs about the 
Genii, or the Elohim, which preside over and 
guide the septenary stages of the World's 
Course. 

664. Prom the first, the Orientalists have 
found themselves beset by great difficulties 
with regard to any possible order in the 
Purinic CreoHons. Brahma is very often 
confused with Brahmi, by Wilson, for which 
be is criticised by his successors. The " OH- 
gimai Sanscrit Texts" are preferred by Mr. 
Fitscdward Hall for the translation of Vish- 



MM Purina and texts, to those used by Wil- 
son. "Had Professor Wilson enjoyed the 
advantages which are now at the command 
of the student of Indian philosophy, unques- 
tionably he would have expressed himself dif- 
ferently," ss said by the editor of hia worka. 
This reminds one of the answer given by 
one of Thomas Taylor's admirers to those 
scholars who criticised his translations of 
Plato. "Thomas Taylor may have had less 
knowledge of the Greek than his critics have, 
but be understood Plato far better than they 
do," he said. Our present Orientalists dis- 
figure the mystic sense of the Sanskrit texts 
far more than Wilson ever did, though the 
latter is undeniably guilty of very gross 
errors. 
665. Page 75. 



454 



THE SECRET DOCTRINB 



from perceiving the truth. This is called "incongruity" and "contra- 
dictions" by the Orientalists.*** 

This "creation" of the immortals, the "DevorSarga," is the last of the 
first series, and has a universal reference; namely, to Evolutions in 
general, not specifically to our Manvantara; but the latter begins with 
the same over and over again, showing that it refers to several dis- 
tinct Kalpas. For it is said " at the close of the past (Padma) Kalpa 
the divine Brahma awoke from his night of sleep and beheld the uni- 
verse void." Then Brahma is shown going once more over the " seven 
creations " in the secondary stage of evolution, repeating the first three 
on the objective plane. 

(IV) The Mukhya, the Primary as it begins the series of four. Nei- 
ther the word "inanimate" bodies nor yet immovable things, as trans- 
lated by Wilson, gives a correct idea of the Sanskrit terms used. Eso- 
teric philosophy is not the only one to reject the idea of any atom being 
inorganic, for it is found also in orthodox Hinduism. Moreover, Wilson 
himself says:**^ "All the Hindu systems consider v^etable bodies as 
endowed with life. . ." Charachara, or the synonymous sthdvara and 
jangama, is, therefore, inaccurately rendered by " animate and inani- 
mate," " sentient beings," and " unconscious," or " conscious and un- 
conscious beings," etc., etc. " Locomotive and fixed " would be better, 
since trees are considered to possess souls. Mukhya is the "creation'* 
or organic evolution of the v^etable kingdom. In this secondary 
Period, the three degrees of Elemental or Rudimental Kingdoms are 
evolved in this world, corresponding inversely in order to the three 
Prakritic creations during the Primary period of Brahma's activity. As 
in that period, in the words of Vishnu Purdna: " The first creation 
was that of Mahat (Intellect), the second, of Tanm6tras (rudimental 
principles), and the third, that of the senses (Aindri)raka)"; in this 
one, the order of the Elemental Forces stands thus: (1) The nascent 
centers of Force (intellectual and physical) ; (2) the rudimental prin- 
ciples — nerve force, so to say; and (3) nascent apperception, which 
is the Mahat of the lower kingdoms, especially developed in the 
third order of Elementals; these are succeeded by the objective king- 



666. The three Creations heginnkig with 
Intelligence are elemental, but the six crea- 
tiona which proceed from the aeries of whicfh 
Intellect is the first are the work of Brahmi 
iVAyu PurAna). Here "creations'* mean ev- 
erywhere stages of Evolution. Mahat, " In- 
tellect '* or mind (which corre^wnds with 
Manas, the former being on the Cosmic, and 
the latter on the human plane) stands here, 
too, lower than Buddhi or Supra-diTine Intel- 



ligenoe. Therefore, when we read in 
PurAna that "the first Creation was that of 
Mahat. Intellect being the first in manifesta- 
tion," we must refer that (specified) crea- 
tion to the first erolutioo of our wjtibfm or 
even our Earth, none of the preceding ones 
being discussed in the PurSmas, bat only oc^ 
casionalljr hinted at. 

667. In his collected Works, voL fiU, p. 
381. 



CREATIONS CONTINUED 455 

dom of minerals, in which latter that apperception is entirely latent, to 
re-develop only in the plants. The mukhya " Creation," then, is the 
middle point between the three lower and the three higher kingdoms, 
which represent the seven esoteric kingdoms of Kosmos, as of Earth. 

(V) The Tiryaksrotas (or Tairyagyonya) creation,*** that of the 
"(sacred) animals," corresponding only on Earth, to the dumb animal 
creation. That which is meant by "animals" in primary Creation, is 
the germ of awakening consciousness or of apperception, that which is 
faintly traceable in some sensitive plants on Earth and more distinctly 
in the protistic monera.*** On our globe, during the first round, animal 
"creation" precedes that of man, while the former (or mammal) 
evolves from the latter in our fourth round — on the physical plane: 
in Round I the animal atoms are drawn into a cohesion of human phys- 
ical form ; while in Round IV the reverse occurs according to magnetic 
conditions developed during life. And this is metempsychosis V^ This 
fifth stage of evolution, called exotcrically " Creation," may be viewed 
in both the Primary and Secondary periods, one as the Spiritual and 
Cosmic, the other as the material and terrestrial. It is Archibiosis, or 
life-origination — " origination," so far, of course, as the manifestation 
of life on all the seven planes is concerned It is at this period of Rvol' 
ution that the absolutely eternal universal motion, or vibration, that 
which is called in Esoteric language ** the ckcat breath," dHfcrentizt^% 
in the primordial, first manifested atom. More and more, as chemical 
and physical sciences progress, does this occult axiom find iU a/rrfAMfT' 
ation in the world of knowledge: the scientific hyprAhf^n, that even 
simplest elements of matter are identical in nature and diflf^rr tuftn each 
other only owing to the variety of the di^,tril/ati''yn% of atoms in i\w, 
molecule or speck of substance, or by the mode* of it% atomic vHjrati^m, 
gains every day more ground. 

Thus, as tbe diflfc fe nli atiog of the ;r:rv>r^ial a5'*rfm oi ljf« \ii^% ift j/f*> 
cede the evohition of the I^yhi Ch'-'T-an of the third '/r'np f/r Ki**r*f ' Sy 
of Being in Prinurr Creatice. btfo^-e tV/t^ "* f^^A\ ** ^mu W/^r*^ rUpa 
(embodied in tbcir first ethereal i^jrr.^, v> arr^-Al ff*3i*>xj Sax t/y 




iA «^'^'<vi #4 4(i*4 «M<< m^< . m 1*^'* 






456 



THE SECRET DOCTRINE 



precede, for that same reason, divine man on earth. And this is why 
we find in the Puranas : " The fifth, the Tairyagyonya creation, was 
that of animals," and — 

(VI) The tJrdhvasrotas creation, or that of divinities.*^* But these 
(divinities) are simply the prototypes of the First Race, the fathers of 
their "mind-born" progeny with the soft bones.*^* It is these who be- 
came the Bvolvers of the " Sweat-bom " — an expression explained in 
Book II. Finally, the sixth " Creation " is followed, and " Creation " 
in general, closed by — 

(VII) The evolution of the "Arvaksrotas beings, which was the 
seventh, and was that of man." •^^ 

The " eighth creation " mentioned is no Creation at all ; it is a blind 
again, for it refers to a purely mental process: the cognition of the 
**ninth" creation, which, in its turn, is an effect, manifesting in the 
secondary of that which was a " Creation " in the Primary (Pr&krita) 
Creation.*^* The Eighth, then, called Anugraha (the Pratyayasarga or 
the intellectual creation of the Sankhyas, explained in Karika)^^ is "that 
creation of which we have a perception " — in its esoteric aspect — and 
"to which we give intellectual assent (Anugraha) in contradistinction 
to organic creation," It is the correct perception of our relations to the 
whole range of " gods " and especially of those we bear to the Kum&ras 
— the so-called " Ninth Creation " — which is in reality an aspect of or 
reflection of the sixth in our manvantara (the Vaivasvata). "There 
is a ninth, the Kumara Creation, which is both primary and secondary," 
says Vishnu Purdna, the oldest of such texts.*^* "The Kumdras,** 



671. Vishnu PurAna, Book I, chap. L 

672. ** Created beinga "— explains yith- 
nu Purdna — "although they arc destroyed 
[in their indiTidnal forms] at die perioda of 
diasolntion, yet being affected by the good or 
ertl acts of former exitttneet, arc nercr ex* 
empted from their conaequencea. And when 
Brahmi produces the world anew, they are 
the progeny of hia will . • .*' *' ColltcHng 
his mind into iUslf [Yoga wiUing], Brahmi 
creates the four orders of beings, termed 
gods, demons, progenitors, and MEN "... 
"progenitors'* meaning the prototypes and 
Evolvers of the first Root Race of men. The 
progenitors are the Pitris, and are of aeren 
classes. They are said in exoteric mythology 
to be bom of Brahma's side, like Eve from 
the rib of Adam. 

673. Vishnu PurAna, Book L 



674. "These notions," remarks Dr. Wil- 
ton, "the Urth of Rudra and the ninta, 
seem to have been borrowed from the Sai- 
▼as, and to have been awkwardly engrafted 
upon the Vaishnava system." The ea o teik 
mea nin g ought to havft been consulted before 
venturing such a hypothesis. 

675. Verse 46, p. 146. 

676. Pariiara, the Vedic Rishi. who t«> 
ceived the Vishnu PurAna from Pnlastya and 
taught it to Maitreya, is placed by the OH* 
entalists at varioua epocha. Aa correctly o^ 
served, in the HindA Class, Dtn.>-" Specn- 
lationa aa to hia era differ widely froai S75 
a. c to 1391 a. c, and cannot be trusted," 
Quite so; but no less, however, than any 
other date aa aaaigned by the S an aki i t' 
ists, so famous in this department of arW- 
trary fancy. 



WHO THE KUMARAS ARE 



457 



explains an esoteric text, " are the Dhyanis, derived immediately from 
the supreme Principle, who reappear in the Vaivasvata Manu period, for 
the progress of mankind." •^^ The commentator of the Vishnu Purana 
corroborates it, by remarking that " these sages live as long as Brahma ; 
and they are only created by him in the first Kalpa, although their gen- 
eration is very commonly and inconsistently introduced in the Varaha, 
or Padtna Kalpa" (the secondary). Thus, the Kumaras are, exoteric- 
ally, " the creation of Rudra or Nilalohita, a form of Siva, by Brahma, 
and of certain other mind-bom sons of Brahma." But, in the esoteric 
teaching, they are the progenitors of the true spiritual SEi*? in the 
physical man — the higher Prajapati, while the Pitris, or lower Praja- 
pati, are no more than the fathers of the model, or type of his physical 
form, made " in their image." Four (and occasionally five) are men- 
tioned freely in the exoteric texts, three Kumaras being secret.*^* 

The Exoteric four are: Sanat-Kumara, Sananda, Sanaka, and San- 
atana; and the esoteric three are: Sana, Kapila, and Sanatsujata. 
Special attention is once more drawn to this class of Dhyan Chohans, 
for herein lies the mystery of generation and heredity hinted at in 
Book I.*^* Book II explains their position in the divine Hierarchy. 
Meanwhile, let us see what the exoteric texts say about them. 

They do not say much ; nothing to him who fails to read between the 
lines. " We must have recourse, here, to other Puranas for the eluci- 
dation of this term," remarks Wilson, who does not suspect for one 
moment that he is in the presence of the "Angels of Darkness," the 
mythical "great enemy" of his Church. Therefore, he contrives to 
elucidate no more than that these (divinities) declining to create 
PROGENY ••^ (and thus rebelling against Brahma), remained, as the 



677. They mmj indeed mmrk a '* special " 
or extra crtaiion, lince it ii they who, by 
incarnating themaeWea within the senaeleM 
human ihells of the two first Root-races* and 
a great portion of the Third Root-race — cre- 
ate, ao to spealc, a n€w roct: that of think- 
ing, self-conadous and divine men. 

678. " The four Kumiras (are) the mind- 
bom Sons of Brahmi. Some specify seven** 
{HimU^ Classical Dicty.), All these seven 
Vaidhitra, the patronymic of the Kumiras, 
** the Maker's Sons," are mentioned and de- 
scribed in Uvara Krishna's SAnkhya KArikd 
with the Cbmmentary of Gaudap&dich&rya 
(Sankarich&rya's Paraguru) attached to it. 
Ik disaisses tlie nature of the Kumiras, 



though it refrains from mentioning by name 
all the seven Kumlras, but calls them in- 
stead "the seven sons of Brahma." which 
they are, as they are created by Brahmi in 
Rudra. The list of names it gives us is: 
Sanaka, Sanandana, San&tana, Kapila, Ribhu 
and Panchaiikha. But these are again all 
aliases. (Compare what is said of "Ths 
Fallen AngeU" in Book II.) 

679. See the four Orders of AngeHs 
Beings; 0>mmentary on Stanxa VI L 

680. So untrustworthy are some trana* 
lations of the OrienUlisU that in the French 
translation of Hari-VanJa, it is said "Tht 
seven Prajapati, Rudra, Skanda (his son) 
and Sanat-Kumira proceeded to create b» 



448 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

And the lower earths, where do they come from? They are from the chom of 
the earth, and from the heaven below, etc., etc.*** 

Irenaeus is our witness (and a very unwilling one, too) that the 
Gnostics taught the same system, veiling very carefully the true esoteric 
meaning. This " veiling," however, is identical with that of the Vishnu 
Purdna and others. Thus Irenaeus writes of the Marcosians : " They 
maintain that first of all the four elements, fire, water, earth and air, 
were produced after the image of the primary tetrcui above, and that 
then if we add their operations, namely, heat, cold, dryness and moist- 
ure, an exact likeness of the ogdoad is presented." •*• 

Only this " likeness " and the ogdoad itself is a blind, just as in the 
seven creations of the Vishnu Purana to which two more are added 
of which the eighth, termed Anugraha, " possesses both the qualities of 
goodness and darkness," a Sankhyan more than a Puranic idea. For 
Irenaeus says again •*^ that 

they [the Gnostics] had a like eighth creation which was good and bad, dirtne 
and human. They affirm that man was formed on the eighth day. Sometimes 
they affirm that he was made on the sixth day, and at others on the eighth; 
unless, perchance, they mean that his earthly part was formed on the sixth day 
and his fleshly part [?] on the eighth day; these two being distinguished by 
them. 

They were so "distinguished," but not as Irenaeus gives it. The 
Gnostics had a superior Hebdomad, and an inferior one, in Heaven; 
and a third terrestrial Hebdomad, on the plane of matter. Iao, the 
mystery god and the Regent of the Moon, as given in Origen's chart, 
was the chief of these superior ** Seven Heavens," ^^^ hence identical 
with the chief of the lunar Pitris, that name being given by them to 
the lunar Dhyan-Chohans. " They afiirm that these seven heavens arc 
intelligent, and speak of them as being angels," writes the same Iren- 
aeus ; and adds that on this account they are termed Iao Hebdomas, 
while his mother was called " Ogdoas," because, as he explains, " she 
preserved the number oi the first begotten and primary Ogdoad of the 
Pleroma." •*• 

This " first begotten Ogdoad " was (a) in theogony the second Logos 
(the manifested) because he was bom of the Seven- fold first Logos, 
hence he is the eighth on this manifested plane; and (t) in astrolatrv* 
it was the Sun, Marttanda — the eighth son of Aditi, whom she rejects 
while preserving her Seven Sons, the planets. For the ancients have 
never regarded the Sun as a planet, but as a central and fixed Star, 

645. Qabbalch, p. 415-16, by L Mjer, 648. Superior to the Spirits or ** Btmr- 
PhiUdelphU. em" of the Earth only. 

646. Bk. I, cfa. xviL 

647. Bk. i» XXX, 6. 649. Ihtd,, Bk. i. t. 2. 



THE SIX STELLAR GODS 449 

This, then, is the second Hebdomad bom of the Seven-rayed one, Agni, 
the Sun and what not, only not the seven planets, which are Surya's 
brothers, not his Sons. These Astral gods, whose chief with the Gnos- 
tics was Ildabaoth»»^ (from Ilda "child," and Booth "the egg"), the 
son of Sophia Achamoth, the daughter of Sophia (Wisdom), whose re- 
gion is the Pleroma, were his (Ildabaoth's) sons. He produces from 
himself these six stellar spirits: Jove (Jehovah), Sabaoth, Adonai, Eloi, 
Ouraios, Astaphaios,^^^ and it is they who are the second, or inferior 
Hebdomad. As to the third, it is composed of the seven primeval men, 
the shadows of the lunar gods, projected by the first Hebdomad. In 
this the Gnostics did not, as seen, differ much from the esoteric doctrine 
except that they veiled it As to the charge made by Irenaeus, who was 
evidently ignorant of the true tenets of the " Heretics," with regard to 
man being created on the sixth day, and man being created on the 
eighth, this relates to the mysteries of the inner man. It will become 
comprehensible to the reader only after he has read Book II, and under- 
stood well the Anthropogenesis of the Esoteric doctrine. 

Ildabaoth is a copy of Manu. The latter boasts, " Oh, best of twice- 
born men! Know that I (Manu) am he, the creator of all this world, 
whom that male Viraj . . . spontaneously produced."*** He first 
creates the ten lords of Being, the Prajapatis, who, as verse 36 says 
. • . " produce seven other Manus." •** Ildabaoth does likewise : " I 
am Father and God, and there is no one above me," he exclaims. 
For which his mother coolly puts him down by saying, " Do no lie, 
Ildabaoth, for the father of all, the first man (Anthropos) is above 
thee, and so is Anthropos, the son of Anthropos." •'* This is a good 
proof that there were three Logoi (besides the Seven bom of the 
First), one of these being the Solar Logos. And, again, who was that 
"Anthropos" himself, so much higher than Ildabaoth? The Gnostic 
records alone can solve this riddle. In Pistis Sophia the four-vowelled 
name lEov is in each case accompanied by the epithet of " the Primal, 
or First man." This shows again that the gnosis was but an echo of 
our archaic doctrine. The names answering to Parabrahm, to Brahm, 
and Manu, (the first thinking man) are composed of one-voweled 
three-vowelcd and seven-voweled sounds. Markos, whose philosophy 
was certainly more Pythagorean than anything else, speaks of a revela- 
tion to him of the seven heavens sounding each one vowel as they pro- 
nounced the seven names of the seven (angelic) hierarchies. 

When spirit has permeated every minutest atom of the seven prin- 

65a See Itit Uunveilid, Vol. II, page vah as Ildabaoth himself. King identifies 

183. him with Saturn. 

651. See also King's Gnostics and thsir 652. I, 33. 

Rfmmms, p. 97. Other sects regarded Jeho- 653. Tfu Ordinancss of Mann, 

654. Irenaeus, Bk. I, ch. xxx, 6. 



458 



THE SECRET DOCTRINE 



name of the first implies, ever boys, Kumaras : that is, ever pure and 
innocent, whence their creation is also called the " Kumanu" •■* The 
Puranas, however, may afford a little more light " Being ever as he 
was bom, he is here called a youth ; and hence his name is well known 
as Sanat-Kumara." **' In the Saiva Purana, the Kumaras are always 
described as Yogins. The KHrma Purana, after enumerating them, says : 
" These five, O Brahmans, were Yogins, who acquired entire exemp- 
tion from passion." They are five, because two of the Kumaras fell. 

Of all the seven great divisions of Dhyan-Chohans, or Devas, there 
is none with which humanity is more concerned than with the Kumaras. 
Imprudent are the Christian Theologians who have degraded them into 
fallen Angels, and now call them '' Satan " and Demons ; as among 
these heavenly denizens who refuse to create, the Archangel Michael 
— the greatest patron Saint of Western and Eastern Churches, under 
his double name of St. Michael and his supposed copy on earth, St 
George conquering the Dragon — has to be allowed one of the most 
prominent places.**' 

The Kumaras, the " mind-bom Sons " of BrahmS-Rudra (or Siva) 
the howling and terrific destroyer of human passions and physical sen- 



ingt." Whereas, as Wilson shows, the ori- 
ginal is: "These seven . . . created pro- 
geny; and so did Rudra, but Skanda and 
Sanat Kumira, restraining their power, ab- 
stained from creatkm." The "four orders 
of beings" are referred to sometimes ss 
"Ambb&msi;' which Wilson renders: "lit- 
erally Waters." and believes it "a mys- 
tic term." It is one. no doubt; but he 
evidently faUed to catch the real esoteric 
meaning. "Waters" and "water" stand 
as the symbol for Akiia, the "primordial 
Ocean of Space," on which Nir&yana. the 
self-bom Spirit, moves: reclining on thit 
which is its Progeny (See Manu), "Water 
is the body of Nara; thus we have heard 
the name of water explained. Since Brahmd 
rests on the water, therefore he is termed 
NArAyana" {Linga, VAyu, and MArkandeya 
PurAnas). "... Pure. Pnrusha created the 
waters pure . . ." At the same time Water 
is the third principle in material Kosmos, 
and the third in the realm of the Spiritual: 
Spirit of Fire, Flame, Akila, Ether, Water, 
Air, Earth, are the cosmic, sidereal, psy- 
chic, spiritual and mystic principles, pre- 
eminently occult, in every plane of being. 



"Gods, Demons. Pitris and men," arc the 
four orders of beings to whom tlie terai 
Ambhimsi is applied (in the Vedas it is a 
synonym of gods): becaose they are aU 
the product of watSis (mystically), of tW 
Alc&tic Ocean, and of the Third principle 
in nature. Pitris and men on earth are the 
transformations (rebirths) of gods and de> 
mons (Spirits) on a higher plane. Water ia» 
in another sense, the feminine principle. 
Venus Aphrodite is the personified Sea, an4 
the mother of the god of love, the g ene r at or 
of all the gods ss much ss the Christian 
Virgin Mary is Mare (the sea), the motbcr 
of the Western God of Love, Mercy and 
Charity. If the student of Esoteric philo- 
sophy thinks deeply over the soblect he la 
sure to find out all the snggestiveness ol tke 
term Ambhimsi, in its manifold relatiDtia to 
the Virgin in Heaven, to the Celntial Mr- 
gin of the Alchemists, and even to tiK 
"Waters of C^race" of the modem BapdaC 

681. Book I, chap, v, Vishnm PmrStm, 

682. Linga PurAn^ prior wtttkom 
174. 

683. See Book II, "The Sacred 
and their Slayers." 



THB PATRON-GUIDE O? ISRAEI« 



459 



ses, which are ever in the way of the development of the higher spir- 
itual perceptions and the growth of the inner eternal man — mystically j**^ 
arc the progeny of Siva, the Mahdyogi, the great patron of all the Yogis 
and mystics of India. They themselves, being the " Virgin-Ascetics," 
refuse to create the material being man. Well may they be suspected 
of a direct connexion with the Christian Archangel Michael, the " Vir- 
gin Combatant" of the Dragon Apophis, whose victim is every soul 
tmited too loosely to its immortal Spirit, the Angel who, as shown by 
the Gnostics, refused to create just as the Kumaras did.*** . . . Does 
not that patron-Angel of the Jews preside over Saturn (Siva or Rud- 
ra), and the Sabbath, the day of Saturn? Is he not shown of the same 
essence with his father (Saturn), and called the "Son of Time," 
Kronos, or Kola (time), a form of Brahma (Vishnu and Siva)? 
And is not " Old Time " of the Greeks, with its scythe and sand-glass, 
identical with the "Ancient of Days" of the Kabalists; the latter 
" Ancient " being one with the Hindu " Ancient of Days," Brahma (in 
his triune form), whose name is also " Sanat," the Ancient? Every 
Kumara bears the prefix of Sanat and Sana; and Sanaischara is Saturn, 
the planet (Sani and Sarra), the King Saturn whose Secretary in Egypt 
was Thoth-Hermes the first. They are thus identified both with the 
planet and the god (Siva), who are, in their turn, shown the prototypes 
of Saturn, who is the same as Bel, Baal, Siva, and Jehovah Sabbaoth, 
The angel of whose face is Mikahl ( ^ tll'» " who is as God "). 
He is the patron, and guardian Angel of the Jews, as Daniel tells us ; ••• 
and, before the Kumaras were degraded, by those who were ignorant of 
their very name, into demons and fallen angels, the Greek Ophites, the 
occultly inclined predecessors and precursors of the Roman Catholic 
Church after its secession and separation from the primitive Greek 
Church, had identified Michael with their Ophiomorphos, the rebellious 
and opposing spirit This means nothing more than the reverse aspect 
(symbolically) of Ophis — divine Wisdom or Christos. In the Talmud, 
Mikael (Michael) is " Prince of Water" and chief of the seven Spirits, 
for the same reason that his prototype (among many others) Sanat- 
Sujata — the chief of the Kumaras — is called Ambhamsi, "Waters," 
— according to the commentary on Vishnu Purdna. Why ? Because 



684. SiTm-Rndrm is the Destroyer, as 
Vislma is the preserver ; and both are the 
refc&erators of qrfrittial as well as of phys- 
ical nature. To live as a plant, the sted 
moMt die. To live as a conscious entity in 
the Eternity, the passions and senses of 
man must first Dit before bis body does. 
"To lire is to die and to die is to live," 
has been too little understood in the WesL 



Siva, the destroyer, is the creator and the 
Savior of Spiritual man, as he is the good 
gardener of nature. He weeds out the 
plants, human and cosmic, and kills the pas* 
sions of the physical, to call to life the per- 
ceptions of the spiritual, man. 

685. See Book II, "The Mystic DrsgonS 
and their Slayers.' 

686. Verse 21. 



»» 



460 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

the " Waters " is another name of the " Great Deep," the primordial 
Waters of space or Chaos, and also means *' Mother/' Ambd, meamng 
Aditi and Akasa, the Celestial Virgin-Mother of the visible universe. 
Furthermore, the " Waters of the flood " are also called " the Great 
Dragon," or Ophis, Ophio-Morphos. 

The Rudras will be noticed in their Septenary character of " Fire- 
Spirits " in the ** Symbolism " attached to the Stanzas in Book II. 
There we shall also consider the Cross (3 + 4) under its primeval and 
later forms, and shall use for purposes of comparison the P3rthagorean 
numbers side by side with Hebrew Metrology. The immense importance 
of the number seven will thus become evident, as the root number of 
nature. We shall examine it from the standpoints of the Vedas and the 
Chaldaean Scriptures, as it existed in Egypt thousands of years b. c, 
and as treated in the Gnostic records ; we shall show how its importance 
as a basic number has gained recognition in physical Science ; and we 
shall endeavor to prove that the importance attached to the number 
seven throughout all antiquity was due to no fanciful imaginings of 
uneducated priests, but to a profound knowledge of natural law. 



§ XIV 
THE FOUR ELEMENTS 

Metaphysicaixy and esoterically there is but One Element in na- 
ture, and at the root of it is the Deity; and the so-called seven ele- 
ments, of which five have already manifested and asserted their exist- 
ence, are the garment, the veil, of thai deity; direct from the essence 
whereof comes Man, whether physically, psychically, mentally or spirit- 
ually considered. Four elements only are generally spoken of in later 
antiquity, five admitted only in philosophy. For the body of ether is 
not fully manifested yet, and its noumenon is still "the Omnipotent 
Father — Aether, the synthesis of the rest" But what are these 
" Elements " whose compound bodies have now been discovered by 
Chemistry and Physics to contain numberless sub-elements, even the 
sixty or seventy of which no longer embrace the whole number sus- 
pected.'*^ Let us follow their evolution from the historical begin- 
nings, at any rate. 

The four Elements were fully characterized by Plato when he said 
that they were that " which composes and decomposes the compound 

687. Vidi Addenda, || XI and XII, qootstions from Mr. Crookcs* 



ON THE EUMENTS 461 

bodies/^ Hence Cosmolatry was never, even in its worst aspect, the 
fetishism which adores or worships the passive external form and 
matter of any object, but looked ever to the noumenon therein. Fire, 
Air, Water, Earth, were but the visible garb, the symbols of the inform- 
ing, invisible Souls or Spirits — the Cosmic gods to whom worship 
was offered by the ignorant and simple, respectful recognition by the 
wiser. In their turn the phenomenal subdivisions of the noumenal 
Elements were informed by the Elementals, so called, the " Nature 
Spirits " of lower grades. 

In the Theogony of Mochos, we find Ether first, and then the air; 
the two principles from which Ulom the intelligible (voiptJ?) God (the 
visible universe of matter) is bom.*** 

In the Orphic hymns, the Eros-Phanes evolves from the Spiritual 
Egg, which the Aethereal winds impregnate. Wind being " the Spirit 
of God," who is said to move in Aether, " brooding over the chaos " — 
the Divine "Idea." In the Hindu Kathakopanishad, Purusha, the 
Divine Spirit, already stands before the original matter, from whose 
union springs the great Soul of the World, " Maha = Atma, Brahm, 
the Spirit of Life"***; these latter appellations being again identical 
with the Universal Soul, or Anima Mundi, the Astral Light of the 
Tbeurgists and Kabalists, being its last and lowest division. 

The crroixcia (Elements) of Plato and Aristotle, were thus the incor- 
poreal principles attached to the four great divisions of our Cosmic 
World, and it is with justice that Creuzer defines those primitive beliefs 
. . . "(w a species of magism, a psychic paganism, and a deification of 
potencies; a spiritualization which placed the believers in a close com- 
munity with these potencies." *** So close, indeed, that the hierarchies 
of those potencies or Forces have been classified on a graduated scale 
of seven from the ponderable to the imponderable. They are Sep- 
tenary, — not as an artificial aid to facilitate their comprehension — 
but in their real Cosmic gradation, from their chemical (or physical) 
to their purely spiritual composition. Gods — with the ignorant masses 
— gods independent and supreme; daemons with the fanatics, who, 
intellectual as they often may be, are unable to understand the Spirit 
of the philosophical sentence, in pluribus unum. With the hermetic 
philosopher they are forces relatively " blind" or "intelligent" accord- 
ing to which of the principles in them he deals with. It required long 
millenniums before they found themselves, in our cultured age, finally 
degraded into simple chemical elements. 

At any rate, good Christians, and especially the Biblical Protestants, 

688. Movers, Dit Phdnisitr, 282. 
€99. Weber, Akad. VorUs,, 213. 214. etc 690. Book IX. p. 850. 



462 THS SECRET DOCTRINE 

ought to show more reverence for the four Elements, if they would 
show any for Moses. For the Bibk manifests the consideration and 
mystic significance in which they were held by the Hebrew Lawgiver, 
on every page of the Pentateuch. The tent which contained the Holy 
of Holies ** was a Cosmic Symbol, sacred, in one of its meanings, to the 
Elements, the four cardinal points, and Ether. Josephus shows it 
built in white, the color of Ether. And this explains also why, in the 
Egyptian and the Hebrew temples — according to Clemens Alexand- 
rinus — a gigantic curtain, supported by five pillars, separated the sanc- 
tum sanctorum (now represented by the altar in Christian churches) 
wherein the priests alone were permitted to enter, from the part access- 
ible to the profane. By its four colors the curtain symbolized the four 
principal Elements, and signified the knowledge of the divine that the 
five senses of men can enable man to acquire with the help of the four 
Elements.*** 

In Cory's Ancient Fragments, one of the " Chaldaean Oracles " 
expresses ideas about the elements and Ether in language singularly 
like that of the Unseen Universe, written by two eminent scientists 
of our day. 

It states that "from ether have come all things, and to it all will retam; 
that the images of all things are indelibly impressed upon it; and that it is the 
store-house of the germs or of the remains of all visible forms, and even ideas. 
It appears as if this case strangely corroborates our assertion that wbaterer 
discoveries may be made in our days will be found to have been anticipated hy 
many thousand years by our 'simple-minded ancestors.' " •• 

Whence came the four elements and the malachim of the Hebrews ? 
They have been made to merge, by a theological sleight-of-hand on the 
part of the Rabbins and the later Fathers of the Church into Jehovah, 
but their origin is identical with that of the Cosmic gods of all other 
nations. Their symbols, whether bom on the shores of the Oxus, on the 
burning sands of Upper Egypt, or in the wild forests, weird and glacial, 
which cover the slopes and peaks of the sacred snowy mountains of 
Thessaly, or again, in the pampas of America, their symbols, we repeat, 
when traced to their source, are ever one and the same. Whether Egyp- 
tian or Pelasgian, Aryan or Semitic, the genius loci, the local god, em- 
braced in its unity all nature ; but not especially the four elements any 
more than one of their creations, such as trees, rivers, motmts or stars. 
The genius loci — a very late after-thought of the last sub-races of the 
Fifth Root-race, when the primitive and grandiose meaning had become 
nearly lost — was ever the representative in his accumulated titles of all 
his colleagues. It was the god of fire, symbolized by thunder, as Jove or 

691. See Siromoia I, t, 1 6. €92, Isis UwoHUd. 



THE COSMIC GODS 463 

Agni ; the god of water, symbolized by the fluvial bull or some sacred 
river or fountain, as Varuna, Neptune, etc. ; the god of air, manifesting 
in the hurricane and tempest, as Vayu, and Indra ; and the god or spirit 
of the earth, who appeared in earthquakes, like Pluto, Yama, and so 
many others. 

These were the Cosmic gods, ever synthesizing all in one, as found 
in every cosmogony or mythology. Thus, the Greeks had their Dodon- 
ean Jupiter, who included in himself the four elements and the four 
cardinal points, and who was recognized, therefore, in old Rome, 
under the pantheistic title of Jupiter Mundus; and who now, in mod- 
em Rome, has become the Deus Mundus, the one mundane god, who 
is made to swallow all others in the latest theology — by the arbitrary 
decision of his special ministers. 

As gods of Fire, Air, Water, they were celestial gods; as gods of 
the lower region, they were infernal deities: the latter adjective apply- 
ing simply to the Earth. They were " Spirits of the Earth" under their 
respective names of Yama, Pluto, Osiris, the " Lord of the lower king- 
dom, etc., etc.," and their tellurial character proves it sufficiently.*** 
The ancients knew of no worse abode after death than the Kamaloka, 
the limbus on this Earth. If it is argued that the Dodonean Jupiter was 
identified with Aidoneus, the king of the subterranean world, and Dis, 
or the Roman Pluto and the Dionysos Chthonios, the subterranean, 
wherein, according to Creuzer,*** oracles were rendered, then it will 
become the pleasure of the Occultists to prove that both Aidoneus and 
Dionysos are the bases of Adonai, or " Jurbo Adonai," as Jehovah is 
called in Codex Nazaraeus. " Thou shalt not worship the Sun, who 
is named Adonai, whose name is also Kadush and El-El," ••* and 
also " Lord Bacchus." Baal-Adonis of the Sods or Mysteries of the 
pre-Babylonian Jews became the Adonai by the Massorah, the later- 
voweled Jehovah. Hence the Roman Catholics are right. All these 
Jupiters are of the same family ; but Jehovah has to be included there- 
in to make it complete. Jupitcr-Aerius or Pan, the Jupiter Ammon 
and the Jupiter-Bel-Moloch, are all correlations and one with Yurbo- 
Adonai, because they are all one cosmic nature. It is that nature and 
power which create the specific terrestrial symbol, and the physical 
and material fabric of the latter, which proves the Energy manifesting 
through it as extrinsic. 

For primitive religion was something better than simple pre-occu- 

693. The Gehtnna of the Bible was a the Egyptian Ainenti a place of purification, 

▼alley near Jeruaalem, where the monothe- (See Isis Unveiled, VoL II, p. 11.) 

ittk Jews immolated their children to Mol- _. t vl h 

och« if the prophet Jeiemiah ia to be believed ' *' ^' "** '* 

on hk word. The Scandinavian Hel or Heta 695. Cod. Nom., 1, 47; aee alao Psatm 

waa a frigid region — again K&maloka — and Ixxxix. 18. 



464 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

pation about physical phenomena, as remarked by Schelling; and prin- 
ciples, more elevated than we modem Sadducees Imow of, " were hidden 
under the transparent veil of such merely natural divinities as thunder, 
the winds, and rain." The ancients knew and could distinguish the 
corporeal from the spiritual elements, in the forces of nature. 

The four- fold Jupiter, as the four-faced Brahma — the aerial, the 
f ulgurant, the terrestrial, and the marine god — the lord and master of 
the four elements, may stand as a representative for the great Cosmic 
gods of every nation. While passing power over the fire to Hephaistos- 
Vulcan, over the sea to Poseidon-Neptune, and over the Earth to 
Pluto-Aidoneus — the aeriai, Jove was all these ; for Aether, from the 
first, had pre-eminence over, and was the s}mthesis of all the elements. 

Tradition points to a grotto, a vast cave in the deserts of Central 
Asia, whereinto light pours through its four seemingly natural apertures 
or clefts placed crossways at the four cardinal points of the place. From 
noon till an hour before sunset that light streams in, of four different 
colors, as averred — red, blue, orange-gold, and white — owing to some 
either natural or artificially prepared conditions of vegetation and sotL 
The light converges in the center around a pillar of white marble with 
a globe upon it, which represents our earth. It is named the "grotto 
of Zaratushta." 

When included under the arts and sciences of the fourth race, the 
Atlanteans, the phenomenal manifestation of the four elements, justly 
attributed by the believers in Cosmic gods to the intelligent interference 
of the latter, assumed a scientific character. The tnagic of the ancient 
priests consisted, in those days, in addressing their gods in their oum 
language. " The speech of the men of the earth cannot reach the Lords. 
Each must be addressed in the language of his respective element " — 
is a sentence which will be shown pregnant with meaning. *' The Book 
of Rules " cited adds as an explanation of the nature of that Element- 
language : '' It is composed of sounds, not words ; of sounds, numbers 
and figures. He who knows how to blend the three, will call forth the 
response of the superintending Power " (the regent-god of the specific 

element needed). 

Thus this " language " is that of incantations or of Mantras, as they 
are called in India, sound being the most potent and effectual magic 
agent, and the first of the keys which opens the door of communicaHon 
between Mortals and the Immortals. He who believes in the words and 
teachings of St. Paul, has no right to pick out from the latter those sen- 
tences only that he chooses to accept, to the exclusion of others ; and St. 
Paul teaches most undeniably the existence of cosmic gods and their 
presence among us. Paganism preached a dual and simultaneous evolu- 
tion : "creation" — "spiritualem ac mundanum," as the Roman Church 



A CONFESSION OF SCIENCE 



465 



has it — ages before the advent of that Roman Church. Exoteric 
phraseolc^y has changed little with respect to divine hierarchies since 
the most pahny days of Paganism, or " Idolatry." Names alone have 
changed, along with claims which have now become false pretenses. 
For when Hato put in the mouth of the Highest Principle — " Father 
Aether" or Jupiter — these words, for instance: "The gods of the 
gods of whom I am the maker (opifex) as I am the father of all their 
works (operutnque parens)"; he loiew the spirit of this sentence as 
fully, we suspect, as St. Paul did, when saying : " For though there 
be that are called gods, whether in heaven or in earth, as there be 
gods many and lords many." . . . etc.'** Both knew the sense and the 
meaning of what they put forward in such guarded terms. 
Says Sir W. Grove, P. R. s., speaking of the correlation of forces : 

The ancients when they witnessed a natural phenomenon, removed from ordin- 
ary analogies, and unexplained by any mechanical action known to them, referred 
it to a soul, a spiritual or preternatural power. ... Air and gases were also 
at first deemed spiritual, but subsequently they became invested with a more 
material character ; and the same words *^<vam, spirit, etc, were used to signify 
the soul or a gas; the very word gas, from geist, a ghost or spirit, affords us 
an instance of the gradual transmutation of a spiritual into a physical concep- 
tion. . . .•" 

This, the great man of science (in his preface to the fifth edition of 
Correlation of Physical Forces) considers as the only concern of 
exact science, which has no business to meddle with the causes. He 
explains : 

Cause and effect are therefore, in their abstract relation to these forces, words 
solely of convenience. We are totally unacquainted zvith the ultimate generating 
power of each and all of them, and probably shall ever remain so; we can only 
ascertain the norma of their actions; we must humbly refer their causation to 
one omnipresent influence, and content ourselves with studjring their effects and 
developing, by experiment, their mutual relations.*" 

This policy once accepted, and the system virtually admitted in the 
above-quoted words, namely, the spirituality of the " ultimate generat- 



696. I Cor. viii. S. We cannot be talcen 
to task by the Protestant* for interpreting 
the Terse from the Corinthians as we do; for, 
if the translation in the English Bible is 
made ambiguoas, it is not so in the original 
texts, and the Roman Catholic Church ac- 
cepts the words of the Apostle in their true 
sense. For a proof see the Commentaries on 
St. Pout's BpistUs, by St John Chrysostom 
'* directly inspired by the Apostle," and 
** who wrote under his dictation," as we are 
assured by the Marquis de Mirville, whose 
works are approved by Rome. And St 



Chrysostom says, commenting on that spe- 
dal verse, "And, though there are (in 
fact) they who are called gods ... — for it 
seems, there are really several gods — withal, 
and for all that, the God-principle and the 
Superior God ceasing not to remain essen> 
tially one and indivisible." • . . Thus spoke 
the old Initiates also, knowing that the wor- 
ship of minor gods could never affect the 
"Cod Principle** (See de Mirville, Des 
Esprits, voL ii, 322). 

697. Page 89. 

698. Page xiv. 



466 'I'HE SECRET DOCTRINE 

ing power," it would be more than illogical to refuse to rec<^;mzc this 
quality which is inherent in the material elements, or rather, in their 
compounds — as present in the fire, air, water or earth. The ancients 
knew these powers so well, that, while concealing their true nature 
under various all^ories, for the benefit (or to the detriment) of the 
imeducated rabble, they never departed from the multiple object in view, 
while inverting them. They contrived to throw a thick ^eil over the 
nucleus of truth concealed by the symbol, but they ever tried to preserve 
the latter as a record for future generations, sufficiently transparent to 
allow their wise men to discern that truth behind the fabulous form of 
the glyph or all^ory. They are accused of superstition and credulity, 
those ancient sages ; and this by those very nations, which, learned in 
all the modem arts and sciences, cultured and wise in their generation, 
accept to this day as their one living and infinite God, the anthropo> 
morphic " Jehovadh " of the Jews. 

What were some of the alleged " superstitions " ? Hesiod believed, 
for instance, that the '' winds were the sons of the giant Typhoeus," 
who were chained and unchained at will by Aeolus, and the pol3rtheistic 
Greeks accepted it along with Hesiod. Why should not they, since the 
monotheistic Jews had the same beliefs, with other names for their 
dramatis personae, and since Christians believe in the same to this day? 
The Hesiodic Aeolus, Boreas, etc., etc., were named Kadim, TMophm, 
Darem, and Rucich Haycm by the "chosen people" of Israel. What is, 
then, the fundamental difference ? While the Hellenes were taught diat 
Aeolus tied and untied the winds, the Jews believed as f ervendy that 
their Lord God, " with smoke coming out of his nostrils and fire out of 
his mouth, rode upon a cherub and did fly; and was seen upon the 
wings of the wind!' ••• The expressions of the two nations arc either 
both figures of speech, or both superstitions. We think they are nddier ; 
but only arise from a keen sense of oneness with nature, and a percep- 
tion of the mysterious and the intelligent behind every natural phenom- 
enon, which tfie modems no longer possess. Nor was it " superstitious ** 
in the Greek pagans to listen to the oracle of Delphi, when, at the ap- 
proach of the fleet of Xerxes, that oracle advised them to " sacrifice to 
the Winds," if the same has to be regarded as Divine Worship in the 
Israelites, who sacrificed as often to the wind and fire — especially to 
the latter element Do they not say that their " God is a consuming 
fire,"^*^ who appeared generally as Fire and "encompassed by fire"? 
and did not Elijah seek for him (the Lord) in the " great strong wind, 
and in the earthquake " ? Do not the Christians repeat the same after 
them? Do they not, moreover, sacrifice to this day, to the same "God 
of Wind and Water"? They do; because spedal prajrers for rain, 

699. II Sawi,, xxU. 9 and 11. TOO. Dent^ hr. 34. 



THE ^GHTIKG GODS 467 

dry weather, trade-winds and the calming of storms on the seas exist 
to this hour in the prayer-books of the three Christian churches ; and 
the several hundred sects of the Protestant religion offer them to their 
God upon every threat of calamity. The fact that they are no more 
answered by Jehovah, than they were, probably, by Jupiter PluzHus, 
does not alter the fact of these prayers being addressed to the Power 
or Powers supposed to rule over the Elements, or of these Powers 
being identical in Paganism and Christianity; or have we to believe 
that such prayers are crass idolatry and absurd "superstition'' only 
when addressed by a Pagan to his idol, and that the same superstition 
is suddenly transformed into praiseworthy piety and religion whenever 
the name of the celestial addressee is changed ? But the tree is known 
by its fruit. And the fruit of the Christian tree being no better than 
that of the tree of Paganism, why should the former command more 
reverence than the latter. 

Thus, when we are told by the Chevalier Drach, a converted Jew, 
and the Marquis de Mirville, a Roman Catholic fanatic of the French 
aristocracy, that in Hebrew lightning is a synon)rm of fury, and is al- 
ways handled by an ewl Spirit; that Jupiter Fulgur or Fulgurans is 
also called by the Christians elicius, and denounced as the soul of light- 
ning, its daemon ; ^^^ we have either to apply the same explanation and 
definitions to the " Lord God of Israel," under the same circumstances, 
or renounce our right of abusing the gods and creeds of other nations. 

The foregoing statements emanating as they do from two ardent and 
learned Roman Catholics, are, to say the least, dangerous, in the pre- 
sence of the Bible and its prophets. Indeed, if Jupiter, the "chief 
Daemon of the Pagan Greeks," hurled his deadly thunder-bolts and 
lightnings at those who excited his wrath, so did the Lord God of 
Abraham and Jacob. We find in II Samuel that "the Lord thun- 
dered from heaven, and the most High uttered his voice, and he sent 
out arrows [thunderbolts] and scattered them [Saul's armies] with 
lightning and discomfited them."^*** 

The Athenians are accused of having sacrificed to Boreas ; and this 
" Demon " is charged with having submerged and wrecked 400 ships of 
the Persian fleet on the rocks of Mount Pelion, and of having become 
so furious "that all the Magi of Xerxes could hardly counteract it by 
offering contra-sacrifices to Thetis." ^*** Very fortunately no authenti- 
cated instance is On the records of Christian wars showing a like catas- 
trophe on the same scale happening to one Christian fleet owing to the 
" prayers " of its enemy — another Christian nation. But this is from 
no fault of theirs, for each prays as ardently to Jehovah for the destruc- 
tion of the other, as the Athenians prayed to Boreas. Both resorted 

701. Cotmotahj, f>. 41S. 702. Chap. zjeU, 14, 15. 703. Herodotus, Potym,, ezd. 



468 'I'HE SECRET DOCTRINE 

to a neat little piece of black magic con amore. Such abstinence from 
divine interference being hardly due to lack of prayers, sent to a 
common Almighty God for mutual destruction, where, then, shall we 
draw the line between Pagan and Christian? And who can doubt that 
all Protestant England would rejoice and offer thanks to the Lord, 
if, during some future war, 400 ships of the hostile fleet were to be 
wrecked owing to such holy prayers? What is, then, the difference, 
we ask again, between a Jupiter, a Boreas, and a Jehovah? No more 
than this: The crime of one's own next-of-kin — say of one's 
" father " — is always excused and often exalted, whereas the crime 
of our neighbor's parent is ever gladly punished by hanging. Yet the 
crime is the same. 

So far the " blessings of Christianity " do not seem to have made any 
appreciable advance on the morals of the converted Pagans. 

The above is not a defence of Pagan gods, nor is it an attack on the 
Christian deity, nor does it mean belief in either. The writer is quite 
impartial, and rejects the testimony in favor of either, neither praying 
to, believing in, nor dreading any such " personal " and anthropomorphic 
God. The parallels are brought forward simply as one more curious 
exhibition of the illogical and blind fanaticism of the civilized theo- 
logian. For, so far, there is not a very great difference between the 
two beliefs, and there is none in their respective effects upon morality, 
or spiritual nature. The "light of Christ" shines upon as hideous 
features of the animal-man now, as the " light of Lucifer " did in da3rs 
of old. 

Those unfortunate heathens in their superstition regard even the Elenients as 
something that has comprehension! . . . They still have faith in their idol 
Vayu — the god or, rather, Demon of the Wind and Air . . . they firmly believe 
in the efficacy of their prayers, and in the powers of their Brahmans orer the 
winds and storms.*** 

In reply to this we may quote from Luke viii. 24: "And he (Jesus) 
arose and rebuked the Wind and the raging of the Water, and they 
ceased and there was a calm." And here is another quotation from a 
prayer book : ..." Oh Vii^ of the Sea, blessed Mother and Lady of 
the Waters, stay thy waves..." etc., etc (Prayer of the Neapolitan 
and Provengal sailors, copied textually from that of the Phoenician 
mariners to their Virgin-goddess Astarte.) The logical and irrepressible 
conclusion arising from the parallels brought forward, and the denan- 
ciation of the Missionary is this : The commands of the Brahmans to 
their element-gods not remaining " ineffectual," the power of the Brah- 
mans is thus placed on a par with that of Jesus. Moreover, Astarte is 
shown not a whit weaker in potency than the " Virgin of the Sea " of 

704. The ICarionaiy Lcroitier, of Codiiii. ia the Jonrmai Us C^iomim. 



PRAYER IS ON£N SORCERY 469 

Christian sailors. It is not enough to give a dog a bad name, and then 
hang him ; the dog has to be proven guilty. Boreas and Astarte may be 
detnls in theological fancy, but, as just remarked, the tree has to be 
judged by its fruit And once the Christians are shown as immoral 
and wicked as the pagans ever were, what benefit has htunanity de- 
rived from its change of gods and idols? 

That, however, which God and the Christian Saints are justified in 
doing, becomes a crime, if successful, in simple mortals. Sorcery and 
incantations are regarded as fables now ; yet from the day of the Insti- 
tutes of Justinian down to the laws against witchcraft of England and 
America — obsolete but not repealed to this day — such incantations, 
even when only suspected, were punished as criminal. Why punish a 
chimera? And still we read of Constantine, the Emperor, sentencing to 
death the philosopher Sopatros for unchaining the winds, and thus 
preventing ships loaded with grain from arriving in time to put an end 
to famine. Pausanias, when affirming that he saw with his own eyes 
" men who by simple prayers and incantations " stopped a strong hail- 
storm, is derided. This does not prevent modem Christian writers from 
advising prayer during storm and danger, and believing in its efficacy. 
Hoppo and Stadlein — two magicians and sorcerers — were sentenced 
to death for throwing charms on fruit and transferring a harvest by 
magic arts from cme field to another, hardly a century ago, if we can 
believe Sprenger, the famous writer, who vouches for it : " Qui fruges 
excantassent segetem pellicentes incantando," 

Let us close by reminding the reader that, without the smallest 
shadow of superstition, one may believe in the dual nature of every 
object on Earth — in the spiritual and the material, the visible and the 
invisible nature, and that science virtually proves this, while denying its 
own demonstration. For if, as Sir William Grove has it, the electricity 
we handle is but the result of ordinary matter affected by something 
invisible f the " ultimate generating power " of every Force, the " one 
omnipresent influence/* then it only becomes natural that one should 
believe as the ancients did ; namely, that every Element is dual in its 
nature. " EtherEai, fire is the emanation of the Kabir proper ; the 
aerial is but the union (correlation) of the former with terrestrial fire, 
and its guidance and application on our earthly plane belongs to a Kqbir 
of a lesser dignity" — an Elemental, perhaps, as an Occultist would 
call it; and the same may be said of every Cosmic Element. 

No one will deny that the human being is possessed of various forces : 
magnetic, sympathetic, antipathetic, nervous, dynamical, occult, mechan- 
ical, mental — every kind of force; and that the physical forces are 
all biological m their essence, seeing that they intermingle with, and 
often merge into, those forces that we have named intellectual and 



470 'I'HE SECRET DOCTRINE 

moral — the first being the vehicles, so to say» the up&dhi, of the second 
No one, who does not deny soul in man, would hesitate in sa3ring that 
their presence and commingling are the very essence of our being; that 
they constitute the Ego in man, in fact These potencies have their 
physiological, physical, mechanical, as well as their nervous, ecstatic, 
clairaudient, and clairvoyant phenomena, which are now rq^ded and 
recognized as perfectly natural, even by science. Why should man be 
the only exception in nature, and why cannot even the Ei^Ements have 
their vehicles, their " Vahans " in what we call the physical forces? 
And why, above all, should such beliefs be called " superstition '' along 
with the religions of old? 



§ XV 
ON KWAN-SHI-YIN AND KWAN-YIN 

Like Avaloldtesvara, Kwan-shi-yin has passed throu^ several trans- 
formations, but it is an error to say of him that he is a modem invention 
of the Northern Buddhists, for under another appellation he has been 
known from the earliest times. The Secret Doctrine teaches that " He 
who is the first to appear at Renovation will be the last to come before 
Re-absorption (pralaya)." Thus the logoi of all nations, from the Vedic 
Vilvakarma of the Mysteries down to the Savior of tiie present ctvfl- 
ized nations, are the " Word " who was " in the bq[inning " (or the 
reawakening of the energizing powers of Nature) with the One Abso- 
lute. Bom of Fire and Water, before these becaune distinct elements^ 
It was the " Maker " (fashioner or modeler) of all things; *' without 
him was not an3rthing made that was made " ; ''in whom was life, and 
the life was the light of men " ; and who finally may be called, as he 
ever has been, the Alpha and the Omega of manifested Nature. ** The 
great Dragon of Wisdom is bom of Fire and Water, and into Fire and 
Water will all be re-absorbed with him" {Fa-HworKing). As dus 
Bodhisattva is said "to assume any form he pleases" from the bq;iniiiiig 
of a Manvantara to its end, though his special birthday (memorial day) 
is celebrated according to the Kin-kwang-nUng-King ("Laminoas Sntn 
of Golden Light") in the second month on the nineteenth day, and 
that of " Maitreya Buddha " in the first month on the first day, yet tfie 
two are one. He will appear as Maitreya Buddha, the last of tiie 
Avatars and Buddhas, in the seventh Race. This bdief and expecta- 
tion are universal throughout the East. Only it is not in the KaU ymg, 
our present terrifically materialistic age of Darkness, the " Black Age,** 
that a new Savior of Humanity can ever appear. The Kali yug it 



DISUSED IMAGINATION 471 

" TAge d'Or " ( I ) cmly in the mystic writings of some French pseudo- 
Occultists.^*^ 

Hence the ritual in the exoteric worship of this deity was founded on 
magic. The Mantras are all taken from special books kept secret by the 
priests, and each is said to work a magical effect; as the reciter or 
reader produces, by simply chanting them, a secret causation which re- 
sults in immediate effects. Kwan-Shi-Yin is AvaloldteSvara, and both 
are forms of the seventh Universal Principle ; while in its highest meta- 
physical character this deity is the synthetic aggregation of all the plan- 
ctsuy Spirits, Dhyani Chohans. He is the "Self-manifested"; in 
short, the " Son of the Father." Crowned with seven dragons, above 
his statue there appears the inscription Pu-Tsi-K'iun-ling, "the uni- 
versal Savior of all living beings." 

Of course the name given in the archaic volume of the Stanzas is 
quite different, but Kwan-Yin is a perfect equivalent. In a temple of 
Pu-to, the sacred island of the Buddhists in China, Kwan-Shi-Yin is 
represented floating on a black aquatic bird (KdkhHansa)^ and pouring 
on the heads of mortals the elixir of life, which, as it flows, is trans- 
formed into one of the chief Dhyani-Buddhas — the Regent of a star 
called the " Star of Salvation." In his third transformation Kwan-Yin 
is the informing spirit or genius of Water. In China the Dalai-Lama 
is believed to be an incarnation of Kwan-Shi-Yin, who in his third 
terrestrial appearance was a Bodhisattva, while the Teshu Lama is an 
incarnation of Amitabha Buddha, or Gautama. 

It may be remarked en passant that a writer must indeed have 
a diseased imagination to discover phallic worship ever3rwhere, as 
do the authors of China Revealed (McClatchie) and Phallicism. 
The first discovers " the old phallic gods, represented under two evid- 
ent symbols — the IChien or Yang, which is the membrum virile, and the 
KhwSn or Yin, the pudendum muliebre." ''^ Such a rendering seems 
the more strange as Kwan-Shi-Yin (AvalokiteSvara) and Kwan-Yin, 
besides being now the patron deities of the Buddhist ascetics, the Yogis 
of Tibet, are the gods of chastity, and are, in their esoteric meaning, 
not even that which is implied in the rendering of Mr. Rhys Davids' 
Buddhism:^^ "The name AvalokiteSvara . . . means 'the Lord who 
looks down from on high.'" Nor is Kwan-Shi-Yin "the Spirit 
of the Buddhas present in the Church," but, literally interpreted, it 
means " the Lord that is seen," and in one sense, " the divine SEW per- 
ceived by Self " (the human) — the Atman or seventh principle merged 
in the Universal, perceived by, or the object of perception to, Buddhi, 
the sixth principle or divine Soul in man. In a still higher sense, Ava- 
lokiteSvara = Kwan-Shi-Yin, referred to as the seventh Universal prin- 

705. See La Mission du Juift. 706. See Phallicism, p. 273. 707. Page 202. 



472 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

ciple is the Logos perceived by the Universal Buddhi — or Soul, as 
the synthetic aggregate of the Dhyani-Buddhas : and is not the *' Spirit 
of Buddha present in the Church/' but the omnipresent universal Spirit 
manifested in the temple of Kosmos or Nature. This Orientalistic 
etymology of Kwan and Yin is on a par with that of " Yogini," which, 
we are told by Mr. Hargrave Jennings, "is a Sanscrit word, in the dia- 
lects pronounced Yogi or Zogee [ ! ], and is equivalent to Sena, and 
exactly the same as Duti or Dutica — i. e,, a sacred prostitute of the 
temple, worshiped as Yoni or Sacti." ^^ " The books of morality," in 
India, " direct a faithful wife to shun the society of Yogini or females 
who have been adored as Sacti . . . amongst the votaries of a most 
licentious description." Nothing should surprise us after this. And it 
is, therefore, with hardly a smile that we find another preposterous ab- 
surdity quoted about " Budh," as being a name " which signifies not 
only the sun as the source of generation but also the male organ." ^•^ 
Max Mtiller, in his False Analogies, says that ''the most celebrated 
Chinese scholar of his time, Abel Remusat," maintains " that the three 
syllables I Hi Wei (in the fourteenth chapter of the Tao-te-king) were 
meant for Je-ho-vah ; ^*** and again. Father Amyot, who " feels cer- 
tain that the three persons of the Trinity could be recognized " in the 
same work. And if Abel Remusat, why not Hargrave Jennings? 
Every scholar will recognize the absurdity of ever seeing in Budh, 
" the enlightened " and " the awakened," a " phallic sjrmboL" 

Kwan-Shi-Yin, then, is "the Son identical with his Father" mys- 
tically, or the Logos — the word. He is called the " Dragon of Wis- 
dom " in Stanza HI, as all the Logoi of all the ancient religious systems 
are connected with, and symbolized by, serpents. In old Egypt, the God 
Nahbkun, " he who unites the doubles," (astral light re-uniting by its 
dual physiological and spiritual potency the divine human to its purely 
divine Monad, the prototype " in heaven " or Nature) was represented 
as a serpent on human legs, either with or without arms. It was the 
emblem of the resurrection of Nature, as also of Christ with the 
Ophites, and of Jehovah as the brazen serpent healing those who looked 
at him; the serpent being an emblem of Christ with the Templars 
also (see the Templar degree in Masonry). The symbol of Knuph 
(Khum also), or the soul of the world, says ChampolHon,^** " is repre- 
sented among other forms under that of a huge serpent on human legs ; 
this reptile, being the emblem of the good genius and the veritable 
Agathodaimon, is sometimes bearded." The sacred animal is tiins 
identical with the serpent of the Ophites, and is figured on a 



708. Pmic 60. 

709. Round Towers of Ireland: quoted by Mr. HargraTe Jenniiift in PkBOieinm, p, JM. 

710. Seifnee of Religion, p. 332. 711. PantlUon, text S. 



I 



SNOBS, OR DRAGONS? 473 

number of engraved stones, called Gnostic or Basilidean gems. This 
serpent appears with various heads (htunan and animal), but its gems 
are always foimd inscribed with Ae name XNOYBIS (Chnoubis). 
This symbol is identical with one which, according to lamblichos and 
Champollion, was called "the first of the celestial gods"; the god 
Hermes, or Mercury with the Greeks, to which god Hermes Trisme- 
gistos attributes the invention of, and the first initiation of men into, 
magic; and Mercury is Budh, Wisdom, Enlightenment, or "Re- 
awakening " into the divine Science. 

To close, K wan-Shi- Yin and Kwan-Yin are the two aspects (male 
and female) of the same principle in Kosmos, Nature and Man, of 
divine wisdom and intelligence. They are the " Christos-Sophia " of 
the mystic Gnostics — the Logos and its Sakti. In their longing for 
the expression of some mysteries never to be wholly comprehended by 
the profane, the Ancients, knowing that nothing could be preserved in 
human memory without some outward symbol, have chosen the (to us) 
often ridiculous images of the Kwan-Yins to remind man of his origin 
and inner nature. To the impartial, however, the Madonnas in crino- 
lines and the Christs in white kid gloves must appear far more absurd 
than the Kwan-Shi-Yin and Kwan-Yin in their dragon garb. The sub- 
jective can hardly be expressed by the objective. Therefore, since the 
S3rmbolic formula attempts to characterize that which is above scientific 
reasoning, and as often far beyond our intellects, it must needs go 
be3rond that intellect in some shape or other, or else it will fade out 
from human remembrance. 



BOOK I — PART III 



ADDENDA 



SCIENCE AND THE SECRET 
DOCTRINE CONTRASTED 



" The knowledge of this nether world — 
Say, friend, what is it, false or true? 

The false, what mortal cares to know? 
The true, what mortal ever knew?" 



CONTENTS 



I. Reasons for these Addenda 



• • • • 



• • * • • 



II. Modern PHYSiasTs are Pitying at Bund Man's Buff 
III. "An Lumen Sit Corpus, Nec Non" 



IV. Is Gravitation a Law? ... 



• • • • • 



V. The Theories of Rotation in Science 

VL The Masks of Science 

VII. An Attack on the Scientific Theory of Force 
of Science 



VIII. Life, Force, or Gravity? . .. 
IX. The Solar Theory 



X. The Coming Force 



XL On the Elements and Atoms . . . 



XII. Ancient Thought in Modern Dress 
Xin. The Modern Nebular Theory 



XIV. Forces — Modes of Motion or Intelugences ? 



XV. Gods, Monads, and Atoms 

XVI. Cycuc Evolution and Karma 

XVII. The Zodlac and its Antiquity 

XVIII. Summary of the Mutual Position 



• • • • 



BY A 



Man 



... 477 

... 482 

... 483 

• . . 41V 

• • • «^^w 

• • • •n^/ 



... 529 

... 540 

... 554 

.. . 566 

... 579 

... 5ao 

... 601 

... 610 

... 634 

... 6C 
668 



MUTUAI, POSITION DEFINED 477 



ADDENDA TO BOOK I 



REASONS FOR THESE ADDENDA 

Many of the doctrines contained in the foregoing Seven Stanzas and 
Commentaries having been studied and critically examined by some 
Western Theosophists, certain of the occult teachings have been found 
wanting from the ordinary standpoint of modem scientific knowledge. 
They seemed to encounter insuperable difficulties in the way of their 
acceptance, and to require reconsideration in view of scientific criticism. 
Some friends have already been tempted to regret the necessity of so 
often calling in question the assertions of modem Science. It appeared 
to them — and I here repeat only their arguments — that "to nm 
counter to the teachings of its most eminent exponents, was to court a 
premature discomfiture in the eyes of the Western World." 

It is, therefore, desirable to define once and for all the position which 
the writer, who does not agree in this with her friends, intends to main- 
tain. So far as Science remains what in the words of Professor Huxley 
it is, viz., "organized common sense"; so far as its inferences are 
drawn from accurate premisses — its generalizations resting on a purely 
inductive basis — every Theosophist and Occultist welcomes respect- 
fully and with due admiration its contributions to the domain of cosmo- 
logical law. There can be no possible conflict between the teachings of 
occult and so-called exact Science, where the conclusions of the latter 
are grounded on a substratum of unassailable fact. It is only when its 
more ardent exponents, over-stepping the limits of observed phenomena 
in order to penetrate into the arcana of Being, attempt to wrench the 
formation of Kosmos and its living Forces from Spirit, and attribute 
all to blind matter, that the Occultists claim the right to dispute and call 
in question their theories. Science cannot, owing to the very nature of 
things, unveil the mystery of the universe around us. Science can, it 
is true, collect, classify, and generalize upon phenomena ; but the occult- 
ist arguing from admitted metaphysical data, declares that the daring 
explorer, who would probe the inmost secrets of Nature, must trans- 
cend the narrow limitations of sense, and transfer his consciousness 
into the region of noumena and the sphere of primal causes. To effect 
this, he must develop faculties which are absolutely dormant — save 



478 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

in a few rare and exceptional cases — in the constitution of the off- 
shoots of our present Fifth Root-race in Europe and America. He can 
in no other conceivable manner collect the facts on which to base hb 
speculations. Is not this apparent on the principles of Inductive Logic 
and Metaphysics alike? 

On the other hand, whatever the writer may do, she will never be 
able to satisfy both Truth and Science. To offer the reader a systematic 
and tminterrupted version of the Archaic Stanzas is impossible. A gap 
of 43 verses or Slokas has to be left between the 7th (already given) 
and the 51st, which is the subject of Book II, thou^ the latter are 
made to nm from 1 et seq. for easier reading and reference. The ap- 
pearance of man on Earth alone occupies as many stanzas, which 
describe minutely his primal evolution from the human Dhyan Chohans ; 
the state of the globe at that time, etc., etc. A great number of names 
referring to chemical substances and other compounds, which have 
now ceased to ccmibine together, and are therefore unknown to the 
later offshoots of our Fifth Race, occupy a considerable space. As 
they are simply untranslatable, and would remain in every case inex- 
plicable, they are omitted, along with those which cannot be made 
public. Nevertheless, even the little that is given will irritate any fol- 
lower and defender of dogmatic materialistic Science who happens to 
read this. 

Before proceeding to other Stanzas, it is proposed, therefore, to de- 
fend those already given. They are not in perfect accord or harmoay 
with modem Science — this we all know. Had they been, however, as 
much in agreement with the views of modem knowledge as a lecture 
by Sir W. Thomson, they would have been rejected all the same. 
For they teach belief in conscious Powers and Spiritual Entities; in 
terrestrial, semi-intelligent, and highly intellectual Forces on other 
planes f^* and in Beings that dwell around us in spheres imperceptible, 
whether through telescope or microscope. Hence the necessity of ex- 
amining the beliefs of materialistic Science: of comparing its views 
about the " Elements " with the opinions of the ancients, and of analys- 
ing the physical Forces as they exist in modem perception before the 
Occultists admit themselves to be in the wrcmg. We shall touch upon 
the constitution of the Sun and planets, and the occult characteristics 
of what are called Devas and Genii, and are now termed by Science, 
Force, or "modes of motion," and see whether esoteric belief is de- 
fensible or not.^^' Notwithstanding the efforts made to the contrary, 
an unprejudiced mind will discover under Newton's "agent, material 

712. Their inteltectkm, of coune, beinc 713. Vidt infrm, ''Godt» 

of quite a different nature to any we can Atoms." 
conoeiye of on Earth. 



DUAI, NATURE OP THE SUN 479 

or immaterial " (of his third letter to Bentley), the agent which causes 
gravity, and, in his personal working God, one finds just as much of 
the metaphysical devas and genii, as in Kepler's angelus rector con- 
ducting each planet, and the species immateriata by which the celestial 
bodies were carried along in their courses, according to that astronomer. 

We shall have, in Book II, to openly approach dangerous subjects. 
We must bravely face Science and declare, in the teeth of materialistic 
learning, of Idealism, Hylo-Idealism, Positivism and all-denying mod- 
cm Psychology, that the true Occultist believes in " Lords of Light " ; 
that he believes in a Sun, which, far from being simply '' a lamp of 
day" moving in accordance with physical law, and far from being 
merely one of those Suns, which according to Richter — " . . . are 
Sun-flowers of a higher light " — is, like milliards of other Suns, the 
dwelling or the vehicle of a god, and a host of gods. 

In this question, of course, it is the Occultists who will be worsted. 
They will be considered on the prima facie aspect of the dispute to be 
ignoramuses, and labeled with more than one of the usual epithets 
given to those whom the superficially judging public, itself ignorant of 
the great underl3ang truths in nature, accuses of believing in medieval 
superstitions. Let it be so. Submitting beforehand to every criticism 
in order to go on with their task, they only claim the privilege of 
showing that the physicists are as much at loggerheads among them- 
selves in their speculations, as the latter are with the teachings of 
Occultism. 

The Sun is matter, and the Sun is Spirit. Our ancestors — the 
"heathen" — along with their modem successors, the Parsis — were, 
and are, wise enough in their generation to see in it the symbol of 
Divinity, and at the same time to sense within, concealed by the phys- 
ical Symbol, the bright God of Spiritual and terrestrial Light. Such 
belief is now regarded as a superstition only by rank materialism, 
which denies Deity, Spirit, Soul, and admits no intelligence outside the 
mind of man. But if too much of wrong superstition bred by 
" Churchianity " — as Laurence Oliphant calls it — " renders a man 
a fool," too much scepticism makes him mad. We prefer the charge 
of folly in believing too much, to that of a madness which denies 
everything, as do Materialism and Idealism. Hence, the Occultists 
are fully prepared to receive their dues from Materialism, and to 
meet the adverse criticism which will be poured on this work, not for 
writing it, but for believing in that which it contains. 

Therefore the discoveries, hypotheses, and unavoidable objections 
which will be brought forward by the scientific critics must be anti- 
cipated and disposed of. It has also to be shown how far the occult 



480 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

teachings dq)art from real science, and whether the ancient or the 
modem theories are the most logically and philosophically correct 
The unity and mutual relations of all parts of Kosmos were known 
to the ancients, before they became evident to modem astronomers 
and philosophers. And even if the extemal and visible portions of 
the Universe and their mutual relations cannot be explained in any 
other terms than those used by the adherents of the mechanical theory 
of the Universe in physical science, it follows that no materialist, who 
denies that the Soul of Kosmos (which appertains to metaphysical 
philosophy) exists, has the right to trespass upon that metaphysical 
domain. That physical science is trying to, and actually does, en- 
croach upon it, is only one more proof that " might is right," and 
no more. 

Another good reason for these Addenda is this. Since only a certain 
portion of the Secret teachings can be given out in the present age, 
if they were published without any explanations or commentary, the 
doctrines would never be understood even by theosophists. Therefore 
they must be contrasted with the speculations of modem science. 
Archaic axioms must be placed side by side with modem hypotheses 
and comparison left to the sagacious reader. 

On the question of the " Seven Governors," as Hermes calls the 
" Seven Builders," the Spirits which guide the operations of nature, 
the animated atoms of which are the shadows, in their world, of their 
Primaries in the astral realms — this work will, of course, besides the 
men of Science, have every materialist against it. But this opposition 
can, at most, be only temporary. People have laughed at everything 
and scouted every unpopular idea at first, and then ended by accepting 
it. Materialism and scepticism are evils that must remain in the world 
as long as man has not quitted his present gross form to don the one 
he had during the first and second races of this Round. Unless scep- 
ticism and our present natural ignorance are equilibrated by intuition 
and a natural spirituality, every being afflicted with such feelings will 
see in himself no better than a bundle of flesh, bones, and muscles, 
with an empty garret inside him which serves the purpose of storing 
his sensations and feelings. Sir Humphry Davy was a great scientist, 
as deeply versed in physics as any theorist of our day, yet he loathed 
materialism. " I heard with disgust," he says, " in the dissecting rooms, 
the plan of the physiologist, of the gradual secretion of matter, and its 
becoming endued with irritability, ripening into sensibility, and acquir- 
ing such organs as were necessary, by its own inherent forces, and at 
last rising into intellectual existence." Nevertheless, physiologists arc 
not the most to be blamed for speaking of that only which they can see 
and estimate on the evidence of their physical senses. Astronomers 



THE SONS O? LIGHT 481 

and physicists are, we consider, far more illogical in their materialistic 
views than even physiologists, and this has to be proved. Milton's — 

Light 

Ethereal, first of things, quintessence pure, 

has become with the materialists only — 

Prime cheerer, light. 

Of all material beings, first and best. 

For the occultists it is both Spirit and Matter. Behind the " mode 
of motion," now regarded as "the property of matter" and nothing 
more, they perceive the radiant noumenon. It is the " Spirit of Light," 
the first bom of the Eternal pure Element, whose energy (or emana- 
tion) is stored in the Sun, the great Life-Giver of the physical world, 
as the hidden Concealed Spiritual Sun is the Light- and Life-Giver of 
the Spiritual and Psychic Realms. Bacon was one of the first to strike 
the key-note of materialism, not only by his inductive method (renov- 
ated from ill-digested Aristotle), but by the general tenor of his writ- 
ings. He inverts the order of mental Evolution when saying that " the 
first Creation of God was the light of the sense ; the last was the light 
of the reason ; and his Sabbath work ever since is the illumination of 
the Spirit" It is just the reverse. The light of Spirit is the eternal 
Sabbath of the mystic or occultist, and he pays little attention to that 
of mere sense. That which is meant by the allegorical sentence, "Fiat 
Lux " is, — when esoterically rendered — " Let there be the ' Sons of 
Light,' " or the noumena of all phenomena. Thus the Roman Catho- 
lics rightly interpret the passage as referring to Angels, and wrongly 
as meaning Powers created by an anthropomorphic God, whom they 
personify in the ever thundering and punishing Jehovah. 

These beings are the " Sons of Light," because they emanate from, 
and are self-generated in, that infinite Ocean of Light, whose one pole 
is pure Spirit lost in the absoluteness of Non-Being, and the other, the 
matter in which it condenses, crystallizing into a more and more gross 
type as it descends into manifestation. Therefore matter, though it is, 
in one sense, but the illusive dregs of that Light whose limbs are the 
Creative Forces, yet has in it the full presence of the Soul thereof, of 
that Principle, which none — not even the " Sons of Light," evolved 
from its absolute darkness — will ever know. The idea is as beau- 
tifully, as it is truthfully, expressed by Milton, who hails the holy 

Light, which is the — 

Offspring of Heaven, first-bom. 
And of th* Eternal co-eternal beam; 

Since God is light, 

And never but in unapproached Light 
Dwelt from Eternity, dwelt then in thee 
Bright effluence, of bright essence increate. 



482 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

II 

MODERN PHYSICISTS ARE PLAYING AT BUND 

MAN»S BUFF 

And now Occultism puts to Science the question : " Is light a body, 
or is it not?" Whatever the answer of the latter, the former is pre- 
pared to show that, to this day, the most eminent physicists know 
neither one way nor the other. To know what is light, and whether it 
is an actual substance or a mere undulation of the " ethereal medium,** 
Science has first to learn what are in reality Matter, Atom, Ether, 
Force. Now, the truth is, that it knows nothing of any of these, and 
admits it. It has not even agreed what to believe in, as dozens of hypo- 
theses emanating from various and very eminent Scientists on the same 
subject, are antagonistic to each other and often self-contradictory. 
Thus their learned speculations may, with a stretch of good-will, be 
accepted as " working h)rpotheses " in a secondary sense, as Stallo 
puts it. But being radically inconsistent with each other, they must 
finally end by mutually destroying themselves. As declared by the 
author of Concepts of Modern Physics: — 

It must not be forgotten that the several departments of Science are stmpljr 
arbitrary divisions of labor. In these several departments the same physical 
object may be considered under different aspects. The physicist may sta^y 
its molecular relations, while the chemist determines its atomic constitution. But 
when they both deal with the same element or agent, it cannot have one set of 
properties in physics, and another set contradictory of them, in chemistry. If 
the physicist and chemist alike assume the existence of ultimate atoms absolutely 
invariable in bulk and weight, the atom cannot be a cube or oblate spheroid far 
physical, and a sphere for chemical purposes. A group of constant atoms cammoi 
be an aggregate of extended and absolutely inert and impenetrable masses im a 
crucible or retort, and a system of mere centers of force as part of a magnet or 
of a Clamond battery. The universal Ether cannot be soft and mobile to please 
the chemist, and rigid-elastic to satisfy the physicist; it cannot be continuous at 
the command of Sir William Thomson and discontinuous on the suggestion of 
Cauchy or Fresnel^ 

The eminent physicist, G. A. Him, may likewise be quoted saying 
the same in the 43rd volume of the Mimoires de VAcadimie Royale de 
Belgique, which we translate from the French, as cited: 

When one sees the assurance with which are today affirmed doctrines which 
attribute the collectivity, the universality of the phenomena to the motions alette 
of the atom, one has a right to expect to find likewise unanimity in the qualities 
ascribed to thb unique being, the foundation of all that exists. Now, from the 
first examination of the particular systems proposed, one feels the strangest decep- 

714. Concepts of Modem Phytics, p. zi-xxii, Introd. to the 2iul Edit. 



NO AGREEMENT AMONG SCIENTISTS 483 

tion; one perceives that the atom of the chemist, the atom of the physicist, that 
of the metaphysician, and that of the mathematician. . .have absolutely nothing in 
common but the name I The inevitable result is the existing subdivision of our 
sciences, each of which, in its own little pigeon-hole, constructs an atom which 
satisfies the requirements of the phenomena it studies, without troubling itself 
in the least about the requirements proper to the phenomena of the neighboring 
pigeon-hole. The metaphysician banishes the principles of attraction and repul- 
sion as dreams ; the mathematician, who analyses the laws of elasticity and those 
of the propagation of light, admits them implicitly, without even naming them. 
. . . The chemist cannot explain the grouping of the atoms, in his often com- 
plicated molecules, without attributing to his atoms specific distinguishing quali- 
ties; for the physicist and the metaphysician, partisans of the modem doctrines, 
the atom is, on the contrary, always and everywhere the same. What am I saying? 
There is no agreement even in one and the same science as to the proper- 
ties OF THE atom. Each constructs an atom to suit his own fancy, in order to 
explain some special phenomenon with which he is particularly concerned.*" 

The above is the photographically correct image of modem Science 
and physics. The " pre-requisite of that incessant play of the * scien- 
tific imagination/ " which is so often found in Professor T)mdairs 
eloquent discourses, is vivid indeed, as shown by Stallo, and for con- 
tradictory variety leaves far behind it any "phantasies" of occultism. 
However it may be, if physical theories are confessedly " mere formal, 
explanatory, didactic devices," and if "atomism is only a symbolical 
graphic system," ^^* then the occultist can hardly be regarded as as- 
suming too much, when he places alongside of these devices and 
" symbolical systems " of modem Science, the symbols and devices of 
Archaic teachings. 



Ill 
AN LUMEN SIT CORPUS, NEC NON ? 



Most decidedly Light is not a body, we are told. Physical Sciences 
say Light is a Force, a vibration, the undulation of ether. It is the 
property or quality of matter, or even an affection thereof — never 
a body I 

Just so. For this discovery, the knowledge — whatever it may be 
worth — that light or caloric is not a motion of material particles, Sci- 
ence is chiefly indebted, if not solely, to Sir W. Grove. It was he who 
was the first in a lecture at the London Institution, in 1842, to show that 

71 S. "Rfcktrchfs fjtpSrimentoUs sur la 716. From the critidtm of Conetpts of 

relation qui gxiste ontre to ritistance d§ Voir Modem Physics in Nature, See Stallo't 
et sa tempirature/* p. 68. work, p. xvi of Introduction, 



484 



THE SECRET DOCTRINE 



" light, heat, etc., etc.^*^ are affections of matter itself, and not a dis- 
tinct ethereal, ' imponderable,' fluid, (a state of matter now) permeat- 
ing it" ^^* Yet, perhaps, for some physicists — as for Oersted, a very 
eminent Scientist — Force and Forces were tacitly " Spirit {and hence 
Spirits) in Nature.** What several rather mystical Scientists tau^t 
was that light, heat, magnetism, electricity and gravity, etc., were not 
the final causes of the visible phenomena, including planetary motion, 
but themselves the Secondary effects of other Causes, for which Sci- 
ence in our day cares very little, but in which Occultism believes, for 
the Occultists have exhibited proofs of the validity of their claims in 
every age. And in what age were there no Occultists and no 
Adepts? 

Sir Isaac Newton held to the Pythagorean corpuscular theory, and 
was also inclined to admit its consequences ; which made the Count de 
Maistre hope, at one time, that Newton would ultimately lead Science 
back to the recognition of the fact that Forces and the Celestial bodies 
were propelled and guided by Intelligences.''^^ But de Maistre counted 
without his host The innermost thoughts and ideas of Newton were 
perverted, and of his great mathematical learning only the mere phys- 
ical husk was turned to account Had poor Sir Isaac foreseen to what 
use his successors and followers would apply his "gravity,"^** that pious 
and religious man would surely have quietly eaten his apple, and never 
breathed a word about any mechanical ideas connected with its fall 

Great contempt is shown for metaphysics generally and for onto- 



717. Mr. Robert Ward, diKtudns the 
questioiu of Heat and Light in the Norem- 
ber Journal of Scitnct, 1881, thowa ua bow 
utterly ignorant ia Sdenoe about one of the 
commoneat facta of nature — the heat of the 
aun. He aaja: — "The queation of the tem- 
perature of the aun haa been the subject of 
iuTestigation with many adentiata: Newton, 
one of the iirat iuTcatigatora of thia prob> 
lem, tried to determine it, and after him all 
the adendata who have been occupied with 
calorimetry have followed hia example. AU 
hove helievtd tkomsehts successful, and hare 
formulated their reaulta with great confid- 
ence. The following, in the chronological 
order of the publication of the reaulta, are 
the t empera turea (in centigrade degreea) 
found by each of them: Newton, 1,699,300 
deg.; PouUlct, 1,461 deg.; Tollner, 102,200 
deg.; Secchi, 5,344,840 deg.; Ericaaon, 
2,726,700 deg.: Flaeau, 7,S00 deg.; Wa- 
teraton, 9,000,000 deg.; Spoiren, 27,000 



deg.; DeriUe, 9,500 deg.; Sorct, 5301346 
deg.; Vicaire, 1,500 deg.; Roaetti, 20^00 
deg. The difference ia aa 1400 deg. ^aiaiC 
9,000,000 deg., or no leaa than 8^98,600 
deg.ll There probably doea not cxitC ia 
adence a more aatoniahing contra<fictka 
than that revealed in theae firm*-** And 
yet without doubt if an OccuMst 
to give out an eatimate, each of these 
tlemen would vehemently protest in the name 
of " Exact " Sdence at the rcjectiMi of hia 
apedal reault (From the Tke^sopkisi). 



718. See CorrstoHcn «/ 
Porcos, Preface. 

719. SokrisM, VoL & 



fft# Pk99k^ 



720. According to 
— Dr. Lewina — "When Sir laaac in 1617 
• . • ahowed maaa and atom acted opoa . . . 
by innate activity ... he effectually itispnid 
of Spirit, Anima, or Divinity, aa lapem og^ 
atory." 



THE METAPHYSICS OF PHYSICAL SCIENCE 



485 



logical metaphysics especially. But we see, whenever the Occultists 
are bold enough to raise their diminished heads, that materialistic, 
physical science is honey-combed with metaphysics;^*^ that its most 
fundamental principles, while inseparably wedded to transcendentalism, 
are nevertheless, in order to show modem science divorced from such 
"dreams," tortured and often ignored in the maze of contradictory 
theories and hypotheses. A very good corroboration of this charge 
lies in the fact that Science finds itself absolutely compelled to accept 
the " h)rpothetical " Ether and to try to explain it on the materialistic 
grounds of atomo-mechanical laws. This attempt has led directly to 
the most fatal discrepancies and radical inconsistencies between the 
assumed nature of Ether and its physical actions. A second proof is 
found in the many contradictory statements about the atom — the most 
metaphysical object in creation. 

Now, what does the modem science of physics know of Aether, the 
first concept of which belongs undeniably to ancient philosophers, the 
Greeks having borrowed it from the Aryans, and the origin of modem 
Aether being found in, and disfigured from Akasa? This disfigure- 
ment is claimed to be a modification and refinement of the idea of Lu- 



721. SUllo't aboTeH:ited work, Concepts 
of Modem Physics, a volume which hat 
eallcd forth the lireliest protesto and criti- 
dtms, is recommended to anyone inclined 
to doubt this statement ** The professed 
antagonism of Science to metaphysics," he 
writes* **has led the majority of scientific 
specialists to assume that the methods and 
results of empirical research are wholly inde- 
pendent of the control of the Isws of thought. 
They either silently ignore, or openly repu- 
diate, the simplest canons of logic, including 
the laws of non-contradiction and . • . resent 
with the utmost Tehemence, every applica- 
tion of the rule of consistency to their hypo- 
theses and theories . . . snd they regard an 
examination (of these) ... in Che light of 
these laws m* an impertinent intrusion of 
'a priori principles snd methods' into the 
domains of enq>irical science. Persons of 
this cast of mind find no difficulty in holding 
that atoms are absolutely inert, and at the 
same time asserting that these atoms are per- 
fectly elastic; or in maintaining that the 
physicml umverse, in its last analjrsis, resolves 
itself into 'dead' matter and motion, and 
yet denying that all physical energy is in 
reality kinetic; or in proclaiming that all 



phenomenal differences in the objective world 
are ultimately due to the various motions of 
absolutely simple material units, and, never- 
theless, repudiating the proposition that these 
units are equaL" ... (p. xix.) '* The blind- 
ness of eminent physicists to some of the 
most obvious consequences of their own 
theories is marvelous. . . . When Prof. Tait, 
in conjunction with Prof. Stewart, announ- 
ces that 'matter is simply passive' (The Un- 
soon Universe, sec. 104), and then, in con- 
nexion with Sir W. Thomson, declares that 
'matter has an innate power of resisting ex- 
ternal influences' (Treat, on Nat, Phil., VoL 
I, sec. 216), it is hardly impertinent to in- 
quire how these statements are to be recon- 
ciled. When Prof. Du Bois Raymond . . . 
insists upon the necessity of reducing all the 
processes of nature to motions of a substan- 
tial, indifferent substratum, wholly destitute 
of quality (' Ueber die Grensen des Naturer- 
kennens,' p. 5), having declared shortly be- 
fore in the same lecture that ' resolution 
of all changes in the material world into 
motions of atoms caused by their consta$t$ 
central forces would be the con^>letion of 
natural science,' we are in a perplexity from 
which we have to be relieved." (Pref. xliiL) 



486 'I'HE SECRET DOCTRINE 

cretius. Let us then examine the modem concept from several scien- 
tific volumes containing the admissions of the physicists themselves. 

The existence of Ether is accepted by physical astronomy, in ordinary 
physics, and in chemistry. Astronomers, who first began by regarding 
it as a fluid of extreme tenuity and mobility, oflFering no sensible resist- 
ance to the motions of celestial bodies, never gave a thought to its con- 
tinuity or discontinuity. " Its main function in modem astronomy has 
been to serve as a basis for hydrodynamical theories of gravitation. In 
physics this fluid appeared for some time in several roles in connexion 
with the * imponderables ' " — so cmelly put to death by Sir W. Grove^ 
Some physicists have even identified the ether of space with those 
'* imponderables." Then came their Kinetic theories ; and from the 
date of the d)mamical theory of heat, it was chosen in optics as a 
substratum for luminous undulations. Then, in order to explain the 
dispersion and polarization of light, physicists had to resort once more 
to their " scientific imagination " and forthwith endowed the Ether 
with (a) atomic or molecular stmcture, and (&) with an enormous 
elasticity, " so that its resistance to deformation far exceeded that of 
the most rigid elastic bodies"^** This necessitated the theory of the 
essential discontinuity of matter, hence of Ether. After having ac- 
cepted this discontinuity, in order to account for dispersion and polar- 
ization, theoretical impossibilities were discovered with regard to such 
dispersions. Cauchy's " scientific imagination " saw in atoms " mater- 
ial points without extension," and he proposed, in order to obviate the 
most formidable obstacles to the undulatory theory (namely, some 
well-known mechanical theorems which stood in the way), to assume 
that the ethereal medium of propagation, instead of being continuous, 
should consist of particles separated by sensible distances. Fresnel 
rendered the same service to the phenomena of polarization. E. B. 
Hunt upset the theories of both.^** There are now men of Science 
who proclaim them "materially fallacious," while others — the "atoroo- 
mechanicalists" — cling to them with desperate tenacity. The suppos- 
ition of an atomic or molecular constitution of ether is upset, moreover, 
by thermo-dynamics, for Clerk Maxwell showed that such a medium 
would be simply gas,''*^ The h3rpothesis of " finite intervals " is thus 
proven of no avail as a supplement to the undulatory theory. Besides, 
eclipses fail to reveal any such variation of color as supposed by Cauchy 
(on the assumption that the chromatic rays are propagated with diflFcr- 
ent velocities). Astronomy has pointed out more than one phenomenon 
absolutely at variance with this doctrine. 

722. Stallo. 723. Smiman's Journal, VoL rtii. p. 364. H «#f. 

724. Sec Qerk Maxwell's Treatise on Bleetricity and Magnetism, and coapai e wHk 

Caticb]r*a Mhnoire tnr la dispersion de la ImnUh^e, 



SCIENTIFIC IMAGINATION 487 

Thus, while in one department of physics the atomo-molecular con- 
stitution of the ether is accepted in order to account for one set of spe- 
cial phenomena, in another department such a constitution is found 
quite subversive of a number of well-ascertained facts, Him's charges 
being thus justified (vide supra). Chemistry deemed it impossible to 
concede enormous elasticity to the ether without depriving it of other 
properties, upon the assumption of which the construction of its modem 
theories depended. This ended in a final transformation of ether. The 
exigencies of the atomo-mechanical theory have led distinguished math- 
ematicians and physicists to attempt to substitute for the traditional 
atoms of matter, peculiar forms of vortical motion in a "universal homo- 
geneous, incompressible, and continuous material medium," or Aether 
(see Stallo). 

The present writer, claiming no great scientific education, but only a 
tolerable acquaintance with modern theories, and a better one with 
Occult Sciences, picks up weapons against the detractors of the eso- 
teric teaching in the very arsenal of modern Science. The glaring 
contradictions, the mutually-destructive h)rpotheses of world-renowned 
Scientists, their mutual accusations, denunciations and disputes, show 
plainly that, whether accepted or not, the Occult theories have as much 
right to a hearing as any of the so-called learned and academical 
hypotheses. Thus whether the followers of the Royal Society choose 
to accept ether as a continuous or a discontinuous fluid matters little, 
and is indifferent to the present purpose. It simply points to one cer- 
tainty: Official Science knows nothing to this day of the constitution 
of ether. Let Science call it matter, if it likes ; only neither as &kaia 
nor as the one sacred Aether of the Greeks, is it to be found in any of 
the states of matter known to modem physics. It is matter on quite 
another plane of perception and being, and it can neither be analysed 
by scientific apparatus, appreciated, nor even conceived by " scientific 
imagination," unless the possessors thereof study the Occult Sciences. 
That which follows proves this statement. 

It is clearly demonstrated by Stallo as regards the crucial problems 
of modem physics (as was done by de Quatrefages and several others 
in those of anthropology, biology, etc., etc.) that, in their efforts to 
support their individual hypotheses and systems, the majority of the 
eminent and leamed materialists very often utter the greatest fallacies. 
Let us take the following case. Most of them reject actio in distans 
(one of the fundamental principles in the question of Aether or Akasa 
in Occultism), while, as Stallo justly observes, there is no physical 
action, "which, on close examination, does not resolve itself into 
actio in distans " ; and he proves it. 



488 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

Now, metaphysical arguments, according to Professor Lodge,^** arc 
"unconscious appeals to experience." And he adds that if such an 
experience is not conceivable, then it does not exist, etc. In his own 
words: "... If a highly developed mind or set of minds, find a doc- 
trine about some comparatively simple and fundamental matter abso- 
lutely unthinkable, it is an evidence . . . that the unthinkable state 
of things has no existence, etc." 

And thereupon, toward the end of his lecture. Professor Lodge in- 
dicates that the explanation of cohesion, as well as of gravity, " is to 
be looked for in the vortex-atom theory of Sir William Thomson." ^"^ 

It is needless to stop to inquire whether it is to this vortex-theory, 
also, that we have to look for the dropping down on earth of the first 
life-germ by a passing meteor or comet (Sir W. Thomson's hypothesis). 
But Mr. Lodge might be reminded of the wise criticism on his lecture 
in the same Concepts of Modem Physics. Noticing the above-quoted 
declaration by the London Professor, the author asks "whether 
. . . the elements of the vortex-theory are familiar, or even possible, 
facts of experience? For, if they are not, clearly that theory is ob- 
noxious to the same criticism which is said to invalidate the assump- 
tion of ACTIO IN DiSTANS." ^*^ And then the able critic shows clearly 
what the Ether is not, nor can ever be, notwithstanding all scientific 
claims to the contrary. And thus he opens widely, if unconsciously, 
the entrance door to our occult teachings. For, as he says : — 

The medium in which the vortex-movements arise is, according to Professor 
Lodge's own express statement (nature^ vol. xxvii, p. 305), ''a perfectly homo- 
geneous, incompressible, continuous body, incapable of being resolved into simple 
elements or atoms: it is, in fact, continuous, not molecular." And after making 
this statement Professor Lodge adds : " There u no other body of which we com 
say this and hence the properties of the aether must be somewhat BifPEi&MT 
from those of ordinary matter," It appears, then, that the whole vortex-atom 
theory, which is offered to us as a substitute for the "metaphysical theory" 
of actio in distans, rests upon the hypothesis of the existence of a material med- 
ium which is utterly unknown to experience, and which has properties somewhat 
different, "" from those of ordinary matter. Hence this theory, instead of being 
as it is claimed, a reduction of an unfamiliar fact of experience to a familiar 
fact, is, on the contrary, a reduction of a fact which is perfectly familiar, to a 
fact which is not only unfamiliar, but wholly unknown, unobserved and nnob- 



725. Nature, Vol. xxvii, p. 304. and chances, and the ** hypothetical " 

726. Stallo. here defined ia not only deatitnte of diflbfva- 



727. Page xxiT. cea* but incapable of difference and 

728. "Somewhat different!" exclaima Stal- — (in the phyaical tenie let na add). Tb« 
lo. ** The real import of thia * aomewhat * provea that if aether ia ''matter** it it S0 only 
ia, that the medium in queation is net, in a^ aomething viaible, tangible and "»*»>< *ig. 



any intelligibU stnst, material at all, having for ipiritnal tentea alone; that it ia a 

none of the propertiea of matter.*' AU the indeed — but not of oar plane: Pater Aether, 

properties of matter depend upon diflerences or Akftla. 



THE PHYSICAI. * phantom" 489 

servable. Furthermore, the alleged vortical motion of, or rather in, the assumed 
ethereal medium is . . . impossible, because "motion in a perfectly homogene- 
ous, incompressible, and therefore continuous fluid, is not sensible motion." 
... It is manifest, therefore, that wherever the vortex-atom theory may lead 
as, it certainly does not lead us anywhere in the region of physics, or in the 
domain of verae causae,^ And I may add that, inasmuch as the hypothetical 
undifferentiated *** and undifferentiable medium is clearly an involuntary re-ifica- 
don of the old ontological concept pure being, the theory under discussion has 
all the attributes of an inapprehensible metaphysical phantom, 

A "phantom" indeed, which can be made apprehensible only by 
Occultism. From such scientific metaphysics to Occultism there is 
hardly one step. Those physicists who hold the view that the atomic 
constitution of matter is consistent with its penetrability, need not go 
far out of their way to be able to account for the greatest phenomena 
of Occultism, now so derided by physical scientists and materialists. 
Cauchy's " material points without extension " are Leibnitz's monads, 
and at the same time the materials out of which the " Gods " and other 
invisible powers clothe themselves in bodies.^*^ The disintegration 
and reintegration of " material " particles without extension as a chief 
factor in phenomenal manifestations ought to suggest themselves very 
easily as a clear possibility, at any rate to those few scientific minds 
which accept M. Cauchy's views. For, disposing of that property of 
matter which they call impenetrability by simply regarding the atoms 
as " material points exerting on each other attractions and repulsions 
which vary with the distances that separate them " — the French 
theorist explains that: 

From this it follows that, if it pleased the author of nature^ simply to modify 
the laws according to which the atoms attract or repel each other, we might 
instantly see the hardest bodies penetrating each other, the smallest particles of 
matter occupying immense spaces, or the largest masses reducing themselves to 
the smallest volumes, the entire universe concentrating itself, as it were, in a 
single point** 

And that " point," invisible on our plane of perception and matter, is 
quite visible to the eye of the adept who can follow and see it present 
on other planes. 

729. y*ra4 emtsag for physical tdenoe are author of nature it naturt itself, aoiiiethinc 
or iUusiofiary causes to the Occult- indistinct and inseparable from the Deity, it 



ist, and vicg versa. follows that those who are conyersant with 

73a Very much " diflFerentiated." on the *^ <^^^'* *««" <>^ »•*"«• "^ ^^"^ ^"^ to 
contrary, since the day k left its layo con- «*»»'^ •"^ provoke new conditions in ether. 
^Hflog, may — not modify the laws, but work and do 

f»t u'j ' 1 »» r- J %M J .the same in accordance with those immutabU 

731. Vtde mfra. Cods, Monads and . ^, 
Atoms " »aw», 

733. Sept leeons de physique ginirale, 

732, For the Occultisto who say that the p. 38 ## seq., ed. Moifno. 



490 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

IV 

IS GRAVITATION A LAW ? 

The corpuscular theory has been unceremoniously put aside; but 
gravitation — the principle that all bodies attract each other with a 
force proportional directly to their masses, and inversely to the squares 
of the distances between them — survives to this day and reigns, 
supreme as ever, in the alleged ethereal waves of Space. As a hypo- 
thesis, it had been threatened with death for its inadequacy to embrace 
all the facts presented to it; as a physical law, it is the King of the 
late and once all-potent " Imponderables." " It is little short of blas- 
phemy ... an insult to Newton's grand memory to doubt it, ..." is 
the exclamation of an American reviewer of " Isis Unveiled/* Well ; 
what is finally that invisible and intangible God in whom we should be- 
lieve on blind faith? Astronomers who see in gravitation an easy-going 
solution for many things, and a universal force which allows them to 
calculate thereby planetary motions, care little about the Cause of At- 
traction. They call Gravity a law, a cause in itself. We call the forces 
acting under that name effects, and very secondary effects, too. One 
day it will be found that the scientific h3rpothesis does not answer after 
all ; and then it will follow the corpuscular theory of light and be con- 
signed to rest for many scientific aeons in the archives of all exploded 
speculations. Has not Newton himself expressed grave doubts about 
the Nature of Force and the corporeality of the "Agents," as they 
were then called ? So has Cuvier, another scientific light shining in the 
night of research. He warns his readers, in the Rivolution du Globe, 
about the doubtful nature of the so-called Forces, saying that " it is not 
so sure whether those agents were not Spiritual Powers after all {des 
agents spirituels). At the outset of his Principia, Sir Isaac Newton 
took the greatest care to impress upon his school that he did not use 
the word "attraction" with regard to the mutual action of bodies in a 
physical sense. To him it was, he said, a purely mathematical concep- 
tion involving no consideration of real and primary physical causes. 
In one of the passages of his Principia,''^^ he tells us plainly tfiat, 
ph)rsically considered, attractions are rather impulses. In section xi 
(Introduction) he expresses the opinion that "there is some subtle 
spirit by the force and action of which all movements of matter arc 
determined " ;^" and in his third Letter to Bentley he says : 

It is inconceivable that inanimate brute matter should, without the mediatioQ 
of something else which is not material, operate on and affect other matter, with- 

734. DeAn. 8. Bk. I. Prop. 69. "Schotmm," 
73S. See Modern Materialism, by Rct. W. F. WiUdnaon. 



GRAVITY OR WHAT? 491 

out mutual contact, as it must do if gravitation, in the sense of Epicurus, be 
essential and inherent in it. . . . That gravity should be innate, inherent and 
essential to matter, so that one body may act upon another at a distance, through 
a vacuum, without the mediation of anything else by and through which their 
action may be conveyed from one to another, is to me so great an absurdity 
that I believe no man, who has in philosophical matters a competent faculty of 
thinking, can ever fall into it Gravity must be caused by an agent acting con- 
stantly according to certain laws; but whether this agent be material or im- 
material I have left to the consideration of my readers. 

At this, even Newton's contemporaries got frightened — at the ap- 
parent return of occult causes into the domain of physics. Leibnitz 
called his principle of attraction "an incorporeal and inexplicable 
power." The supposition of an attractive faculty and a perfect void 
was characterized by Bemouilli as " revolting," the principle of actio 
in distans finding thus no more favor then than it does now. Euler, on 
the other hand, thought the action of gravity was due to either a Spirit 
or some subtle medium. And yet Newton knew of, if he did not ac- 
cept, the Ether of the Ancients. He regarded the intermediate space 
between the sidereal bodies as vacuum. Therefore he believed in 
" subtle spirit " and Spirits as we do, guiding the so-called attraction. 
The above-quoted words of the great man have produced poor results. 
The "absurdity" has now become a dogma in the case of pure mater- 
ialism, which repeats, " No matter without force, no force without 
matter; matter and force are inseparable, eternal and indestructible 
[true] ; there can be no independent force, since all force is an inher- 
ent and necessary property of matter [fcUse] ; consequently, there is 
no immaterial creative power." Oh, poor Sir Isaac ! 

If, leaving aside all the other eminent men of Science who shared 
in the same opinion as Euler and Leibnitz, the Occultists claim as 
their authorities and supporters only Sir Isaac Newton and Cuvier, 
as above cited, they need fear little from modem Science, and may 
loudly and proudly proclaim their beliefs. But, the hesitation and 
doubts of the two before-cited authorities, and of many others, too, 
whom we could name, did not in the least prevent scientific speculation 
from wool-gathering on the fields of brute matter just as before. First 
it was matter and an imponderable fluid distinct from it ; then came the 
imponderable fluid so much criticised by Grove; and Aether, which 
was at first discontinuous and then became continuous; after which 
came the " mechanical " Forces. These have now settled in life as 
** modes of motion " and the aether has become more mysterious and 
problematical than ever. More than one man of Science objects to 
such crude materialistic views. But then since the days of Plato, who 
repeatedly asks his reiaders not to confuse incorporeal Elements with 



492 



THE SECRET DOCTRINE 



their Principles — transcendental or spiritual Elements; from those 
of the great Alchemists, who, like Paracelsus, made a great difference 
between phenomenon and its cause, or the Noumenon; and Grove, 
who, though he sees " no reason to divest universally diffused matter 
of the functions common to all matter," yet uses the term Forces where 
his critics, " who do not attach to the word any idea of a specific ac- 
Hon** say Force — from those days to this nothing has proved com- 
petent to stem the tide of brutal materialism. Gravitation is the sole 
cause, the acting God, and matter is its prophet, said the men of 
science only a few years ago. 

They have changed their views several times since then. But do the 
men of Science understand the innermost thought of Newton, one of 
the most spiritual-minded and religious men of his day, any better now 
than they did then ? It is certainly to be doubted. Newton is credited 
with having given the death-blow to the Elemental Vortices of Des- 
cartes (the idea of Anaxagoras, resurrected, by-the-bye), though the 
last modem "vortical atoms" of Sir W. Thomson do not, in truth, differ 
much from the former. Nevertheless, when his disciple Forbes wrote 
in the Preface to the chief work of his Master a sentence declaring 
that "attraction was the cause of the System," Newton was the first 
to solemnly protest. That which in the mind of the great mathemat- 
ician assumed the shadowy, but firmly rooted image of God, as the 
noumenon of all,^** was called more philosophically by the ancient (and 
modem) philosophers and Occultists — " Gods," or the creative fash- 
ioning Powers. The modes of expression may have been different, and 
the ideas more or less philosophically enunciated by all sacred and pro- 
fane Antiquity; but the fundamental thought was the same.'" For 
Pythagoras the Forces were Spiritual Entities, Gods independent of 



736. "AttracHon," Le Couturier, a materi- 
alitt, writes, ** hat now become for the pub- 
lic that which it was for Newton himself 
— a dmple word, an idea" iPanoratna des 
Mondet), tinoe its cause is unknown. Her* 
schel rirtuallj says the same, when remark- 
ing, that whenever studying the motion of 
the heayenlj bodies, and the phenomena of 
attraction, be feels penetrated at every mo- 
ment with the idea of "the exititnce of 
causi* that act for us under a veil, disguis- 
ing iheir direct action," {Musig des Sci- 
ences, August, 1856.) 

737. If we are taken to task for believing 
in operating ''Gods" and "Spirits" while 
rejecting a personal God, we answer to the 
Theists snd Monotheists: "Admit that your 
Jehovah is one of the Bhhim, and we ai^ 
ready to recognise him. Make of him, as 



you do, the Infinite, the omb and the Btermai 
God, and we will never accept him in tUs 
character." Of tribai Goda there were may; 
the One Universal Deity is a principfe, aa 
abstract Root-Idea which has nao^ to ds 
with the unclean work of finite Form. W< 
do not worship the Gods, we only hooor 
Them, as beings superior to ooraelvcs. la 
this we obey the Mosaic injunctkm, while 
Christians disobey their Bible ~ Missionaries 
foremost of all. " Then skaU uoi revile the 
gods," says one of them — (Jehovah) — ia 
Bxodus, xxiL 28; but at the same tisK ia 
verse 20 it is commanded, " He that ncri- 
ficeth to any God, aave unto the Lord, he 
shall be utterly destroyed." Now in the 
oHginal texts it is not "god** bat BMm, 
— and we challenge contradictioo — and Je- 
hovah is one of the Klohim, aa proved ly 



THE TRIPLE SIDEREAL FORCE 



493 



planets and Matter as we see and know them on Earth, who are the 
rulers of the Sidereal Heaven. Plato represented the planets as moved 
by an intrinsic Rector, one with his dwelling, like " A boatman in his 
boat" As for Aristotle, he called those rulers "immaterial substan- 
ces";'" though as one who had never been initiated, he rejected the 
gods as Entities.''^ But this did not prevent him from recognizing 
the fact that the stars and planets "were not inanimate masses but 
acting and living bodies indeed ..." As if " sidereal spirits were the 
divine portion of their phenomena, ra Oaortpa rwv 4>anpiiv."^^ 

If we look for corroboration in more modem and Scientific times, 
we find Tycho Brahe recognizing in the stars a triple force, divine, 
spiritual and vital. Kepler, putting together the P3rthagorean sentence, 
" The Sun, guardian of Jupiter," and the verses of David, " He placed 
his throne in the Sun," and " The Lord is the Sun," etc., said that he 
understood perfectly how the Pythagoreans could believe that all 
the globes disseminated through Space were rational Intelligences, 
facultates ratiocinativae, circulating around the Sun, " in which resides 
a pure Spirit of fire; the source of the general harmony." '*^ 

When an Occultist speaks of Fohat — the energizing and guiding 
intelligence in the Universal Electric or Vital Fluid, — he is laughed at. 
Withal, as now shown, neither the nature of electricity, nor of Life nor 
even of Light, are to this day understood. The Occultist sees in the 
manifestation of every force in Nature, the action of the quality, or the 
special characteristic of its noumenon; which noumenon is a distinct 
and intelligent Individuality on the other side of the manifested mech- 
anical Universe. Now the Occultist does not deny — on the contrary 
he will support the claim — that light, heat, electricity and so on are 
affections (not properties or qualities) of matter. To put it more 
clearly : matter is the condition — the necessary basis or vehicle, a sine 
qua non — for the manifestation of these forces, or agents, on this 
plane. 

But in order to gain the point the Occultists have to examine the 
credentials of the law of gravity, first of all, of " Gravitation, the King 



hit own words in Gtngsis iiL 22, when " the 
Lord God nid: Behold the Mmn has become 
at ons of us," etc. Hence both those who 
worship and sscrifioe to the Blohim, the an- 
ffels, and to Jehovah, those who revU§ th§ 
gods of their fellow-men, are far greater 
trsnigresaors than the Occultists or any 
Theosophist Meanwhile many of the latter 
prefer believing in some one " Lord " or 
other, and are quite welcome to do as they 
Uhe. 



738. To liken the " immateriate species to 
wood and iron," and laugh at Spiller referring 
to them as "incorporeal matter" does not 
solve the mystery (See ConcopU of Modem 
Physics, p. 165 st infra), 

739. See Vossius, Vol. II, p. 528. 

740. Do Cotlo, L 9. 

741. Do MoHbus pUmstarum harmonicis, 
p. 248. 



494 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

and Ruler of Matter," under every form. To do so effectually, the 
hypothesis in its earliest appearance has to be recalled to mind. To 
begin with, is it Newton who was the first to discover it? The 
Athenaeum of Jan. 26, 1867, has some curious information upon this 
subject. It says that " positive evidence can be adduced that Newton 
derived all his knowledge of gravitation and its laws from Boehme, 
Tvith whom gravitation or attraction is the first property of Nature." 
• . . For with him " his [Boehme's] system, shows us the i$iside of 
things, while modem physical science is content with looking at the 
outside." Then again, " the science of electricity, which was not yet 
in existence when he [Boehme] wrote, is there anticipated [in his 
writings] ; and not only does Boehme describe all the now known 
phenomena of that force, but he even gives us the origin, generation, 
and birth of electricity, itself, etc." 

Thus Newton, whose profound mind read easily between the lines, 
and fathomed Uie spiritual thought of the great Seer in its mystic 
rendering, owes his great discovery to Jakob Boehme, the nursling of 
the genii (Nirmanakayas) who watched over and guided him, of ynhom 
the author of the article in question so truly remarks, that " every new 
scientific discovery goes to prove his profound and intuitive insight into 
the most secret workings of nature," And having discovered gravity, 
Newton, in order to render possible the action of attraction in space, 
had, so to speak, to annihilate every physical obstacle capable of im- 
peding its free action ; ether among others, though he had more than 
a presentiment of its existence. Advocating the corpuscular theory, 
he made an absolute vacuum between the heavenly bodies. . . . What- 
ever may have been his suspicions and inner convictions about Ether; 
however many friends he may have unbosomed himself to — as in the 
case of his correspondence with Bentley — his teachings never showed 
that he had any such belief. If he was *' persuaded that the power of 
attraction could not be exerted by matter across a vacuum," '** how is 
it that so late as 1860, French astronomers (Le Couturier, for in- 
stance), combated " the disastrous results of the theory of vacuum es- 
tablished by the great man " ? ^** Professor Winchell writes : 

These passages (letter to Bentley) show what were his views respecting the 
nature of the interplanetary medium of communication. Though dedaring that 
the heavens " are void of sensible matter," he elsewhere excepted ' perhaps some 

742. WorldLiU, Prof. Wincbell, LL.D. quencct <fe U tMorit dm vide HahHe pv tm 
(pp. 49 and 50.) grand homme, U ne reste phii deboot f«# U 



743. " n n'est pltu pOMiblc anjoord'hai, mot 'attraction,' §t nout vtrrons U 

d* souttnir comm* Nrmton, que les corps ce demkr mot diaparaitra dn vocabolaire ad- 

c^lestet le mourent an milieu du vidb im* entifique.** iPanorama d*s MandM, pp^ 47 

menae dea eapacea. . . . Parmi les cona^ and 53.) 



NEWTON THEN AND NEWTON NOW 495 

YtTj thin vapors, streams, and effluvia, arising from the atmospheres of the 
earth, planets, and comets, and from such an exceedingly rare ethereal medium 
as wc have elsewhere described." '** 

This only shows that even such great men as Newton have not 
always the courage of their opinions. Dr. T. S. Hunt " called atten- 
tion to scmie long-neglected passages in Newton's works, from which 
it appears that a belief in such universal, intercosmical medium grad- 
ually took root in his mind."'** But such attention was never called 
to the said passages before Nov. 28, 1881, when Dr. Himt read his 
" Celestial Chemistry, from the time of Newton/' " Till then the idea 
was universal, even among the men of Science, that Newton had, while 
advocating the corpuscular theory, preached a void," as Le Couturier 
says. The passages had been " long neglected," no doubt because they 
contradicted and clashed with the preconceived pet theories of the day, 
till finally the imdulatory theory imperiously required the presence of 
an " ethereal medium " to explain it This is the whole secret. 

Anyhow, it is from that theory of Newton's of a universal void — 
taught, if not believed in by himself, — that dates the immense Korn 
now shown by modem for ancient physics. The old sages had main- 
tained that " Nature abhorred vacutmi," and the greatest mathemati- 
cians of the world (read of the Western races) had discovered the 
antiquated '' fallacy " and exposed it And now modem science vin- 
dicates, however ungracefully, archaic knowledge, having, moreover, to 
vindicate Newton's character and powers of observation at this late 
hour, after having neglected for one century and a half to pay any 
attention to such very important passages — perchance, because it was 
wiser not to attract any notice to them. Better late than never. 

And now Father Actihcr is re-welcomed with open arm* ; and wedded 
to gravitation ; linked to it for weal or woe, until the day when it, or 
both, shall be replaced by something else. Three hundred years ago it 
was plenum everywhere, then it became one dismal vacuity; later still 
the sidereal ocean-beds, dried up by science, rolled onward fmcc nune 
their ethereal waves. Recede ut procedas mu^t become the m^AXo of ex- 
act Science — " exact," chiefly, in finding itself inexact cytry leap-year. 

But we will not quarrel with the great men. They had to go tiark to 
the earliest " Gods of Ppbzgorzs and old Kanada " Uit the vr,ry back- 
bone and marrow of their correlatir/nt and " newest " di voveri*^, and 
tills may well afford good hope to the ^xxulti%t*, for ilirir rmur^ K^''^^* 
For we believe in Lc Couturier's prrj^htry a>x/iJt jfravitatK/n, We 
know the day is approaching wh^^ an a^jtolute reform will fyr A*-.- 
manded in the p r es e nt modes of Sd-^rvie \fy the %/A^uU\t% th^rrjvIvM - - 



495 



THE SECRET DOCTRINE 



as was done by Sir W. Grove, F. r. s. Till that day there is nothing to 
be done. For if gravitation were dethroned tomorrow, the day after 
the Scientists would discover some other new mode of mechanical mo- 
tion.^^* Rough and up-hill is the path of true Science, and its days are 
full of vexation of Spirit. But in the face of its ** thousand " contra- 
dictory hypotheses to explain physical phenomena, there never was yet 
a better one than that of "motion" — however paradoxically interpreted 
by materialism. As may be found on the first pages of Book I, Occult- 
ists have nothing surely against motion'*^ the great breath of Mr. 
Herbert Spencer's " unknown." But, believing that everything on 
Earth is the shadow of something in space — they believe in smalUr 
" Breaths," which, living, intelligent and independent of all but Law, 
blow in every direction during Manvantaric periods. These Science 
will reject But whatever replaces attraction, alias gravitation^ the 
result will be the same. Science will be as far from the solution of 
its difficulties as it is now, unless it comes to some compromise with 
Occultism and even with Alchemy — which supposition will be re- 
garded as an impertinence, but remains a fact, nevertheless. As Faye 
says : " II manque quelque chose aux geologues pour faire la gfologie 
de la Lune, dest d'etre astronomes. A la viriti il manque aussi 
quelque chose aux astronomes pour aborder avec fruit cette itudt, 
(fest d'etre giologues!' But he might have added, with still more point- 
edness, " Ce qui manque i tous les deux, c'est I'intuition du mystique." 
Let us remember Sir William Grove's wise "concluding remarks,** 
on the ultimate structure of matter, or the minutiae of molecular ac- 
tions, which, he thought, man will never know. 

Much harm has already been done by attempting hjrpothetically to dtssect 
matter and to discuss the shapes, sizes, and numbers of atoms, and their atmo- 
spheres of heat, ether, or electricity. .... Whether the regarding electricity, 
light, magnetism, etc, as simply motions of ordinary matter, be or be not admis- 
sible, certain it is that all past theories have resolved, and all existing theories 
do resolve, the action of these forces into motion. Whether it be that, on accoant 
of our familiarity with motion, we refer other affections to it, as to a langisage 

746, When read in a fair and tmpreju* 
diced spirit. Sir Isaac Newton's worlm are 
an erer ready witness to show how he must 
hare hesitated between graritation and at- 
traction, impulse and some other unkn&um 
eamtg to explain the regular course of the 
planetary motion. But see Trra#w# on Color 
(VoL III. Question 31). We are told by 
Herschel that Newton left with his succes- 
sors the duty of drawing all the scientific 
conclusions from his discovery. How mod- 
em Science abused the privilege of build- 
ing its newest theories upon the law of 



gravitation, may be realised 

members how profoundly religioua was that 

great man. 



747. The materialistic notion that 
in physics real or sensible aotkm is 
sible in pure space or vacnnm, therefore, the 
eternal motion of and in f'^*f**t (regarded 
as infinite Space) is a jfc#»«« — only shows 
once more that such words aa **pare ^aee," 
"pure Being,*' "the Absolute," etc, of 
Eastern metaphysics have never been 
stood in the West 



NEW BOTTI^ES FOR OLD WINS 497 

which is most easily construed, and most capable of explaining them, or whether 
It be that it is in reality the only mode in which our minds at contra-dUlinguiihtd 
from our senses, are able to conceive material agencies, certain It it that since 
the period at which the mystic notions of spiritual or preternatural powers were 
applied to account for physical phenomena, all hypotheses framed to explain 
them have resolved them into motion. 

And then the learned gentleman states a purely occult tenet : — 

The term perpetual motion, which I have not infrequently used in these pages, 
is itself equivocal. If the doctrines here advanced be well founded all molion is, 
in one sense, perpetual. In masses, whose motion is stopped by mutual con- 
cussion, heat or motion of the particles is generated; and thus the motion con- 
tinues, so that if we could venture to extend such thoughts to the universe, we 
should assume the same amount of motion affecting the same amount of matter 
for ever.** 

Thus, supposing attraction or gravitation should be given up in favor 
of the Sun being a huge magnet — which is a theory already accepted 
by some physicists — a magnet that acts on the planets as attracti/m \% 
now supposed to do, whereto, or bow much farther wouW it \tM tt»e 
astronomers from where they are now ? Not an inch tsuriher, Kepler 
came to this "curiotis hypothesis'" nearly 300 years ago. He ha/1 ruti 
discovered the theory of attraction and repuUion in K/auua, fm ii 
was known from the days of Empeddde^, the two Oii^ffmU Um^r^ bdrig 
called by him " hate ** and " love " — which convrt i/^ the *arr»e tUittK. 
But K^ler gave a pretty fair description of cownic rra^t^hm, 7hkt 
such magnetism exists in nature, is as certain a% that i^raviUtKyn ^^% 
not ; not at any rate, in the way in which it i% tz^.t by /> i^^/j', wh.' U 
never took into coosideratioo the ^fferer,t nvyj^ ;r, i^h;/h 0*^ ^, .k\ 
Force — that Oocuhisn: cats attraction! zrA r*r/:Wy/T, - tt^y a^# >>,♦'. n 
oar solar system, the ordi's atn»t;^>!:re, acJ hey/n4 \u *s^ K/A^/y/t ^^ 
This waspro*«iby Xc»r»'-c Lrr.-*eCf ; f^.r *ry:r^ ar^ rr-ck/,/ ;>f^- ryr'-- f^* u 
oar Solar srstesi, wiaci he cor.f*:Hrft/I h t irji-vl/y Vy *^/'^\k,u ^rf *:^ 





496 ^HE SECRET DOCTRINE 

law of gravitation. " Such were the uniformity in the directions of 
planetary movements, the nearly circular forms of the orbits, and their 
remarkable conformity to one plane." ^^^ And if there is one single ex- 
ception, then the law of gravitation has no right to be referred to as a 
universal law, " These adjustments," we arc told, " Newton, in his gen- 
eral Scholium, pronounces to be ' the work of an intelligent and all- 
powerful Being.'" Intelligent that "Being" may be; as to "all- 
powerful " there would be every reason to doubt the claim. A poor 
" God " he, who would work upon minor details and leave the most im- 
portant to secondary forces! The poverty of the argtmient and logic 
in this case, is surpassed only by that of Laplace, who, seeking very 
correctly to substitute motion for Newton's " all-powerful Being," and 
ignorant of the true nature of that eternal motion, saw in it a blind 
physical law. " Might not those arrangements be an effect of the laws 
of motion ? " he asks, forgetting, as all our modem Scientists do, that 
this law and this motion are a vicious circle, so long as the nature of 
both remains unexplained. His famous answer to Napoleon: " Dieu 
est devenu une hypothise inutile,'* would be correctly stated only by one 
who adhered to the philosophy of the Vedantins. It becomes a pure 
fallacy, if we exclude the interference of operating, intelligent, power- 
ful (never "all-powerful") Beings, who arc called "gods." 

But we would ask the critics of the medieval astronomers why should 
Kepler be denounced as most unscientific, for offering just the same 
solution as Newton did — only showing himself more sincere, more con- 
sistent and even more logical. Where may be the difference between 
Newton's "all-powerful Being" and Kepler's Rectores, his sidereal and 
Cosmic Forces, or Angels ? Kepler is again criticised for hb " curious 
hypothesis which made use of a vortical movement within the solar 
system" ; for his theories in general, for his favoring Empedokles' idea 
of attraction and repulsion, and " Solar magnetism " in particular. Yet 
several modem men of Science, as will be shown — Hunt (if Metcalfe 
is to be excluded). Dr. Richardson, etc. — favor the idea very seriously. 
He is half excused, however, on the plea that " to the time of Kepler no 
interaction between masses of matter had been distinctly recognized 
which was generically different from magnetism."*** Is it distinctly 
recognized now? Does Professor Winchell claim for Science any ser- 
ious knowledge whatever of the natures of either electricity or magne- 
tism — except that both seem to be the effects of some result arising 
from an undetermined cause f 

The ideas of Kepler, weeded from their theological tendencies, are 
purely occult He saw that: 

rSO. ProfcMor WiacfaeU. 7SU WfidUi*, P. SSJ. 



CHRONIC NEGATION 



499 



(I) The Sun is a great Magnet J** This is what some eminent 
modem scientists and also the Occultists believe in. 

(II) The Solar substance is immaterial^** 

(III) He provided, for the constant motion and restoration of the 
Sun's energy and planetary motion, the perpetual care of a spirit, or 
spirits. The whole of Antiquity believed in this idea. The Occultists 
do not use the word Spirit, but say Creative Forces, which they endow 
ivith intelligence. But we may call them spirits also. 

This theory is tabooed a great deal more on account of the " Spirit " 
that is given room in it, than of anything else. Herschel, the elder, 
believed in it likewise, and so do several modem scientists also. Never- 
theless Professor Winchell declares that " a hypothesis more fanciful, 
and less in accord with the requirements of physical principles, has not 
been offered in ancient or modem times."'** 

The same was said, once upon a time, of the universal Ether, and 
now it is not only accepted perforce but advocated as the only possible 
theory to explain away certain mysteries. 

Grove's ideas, when he first enunciated them in London about 1840, 
were called as unscientific as the above ; nevertheless, his views on the 
correlation of forces are now universally accepted. It would, very 
likely, require one more conversant with science than is the writer, to 
combat with any success some of the now prevailing ideas about gravi- 
tation and other similar "solutions" of Cosmic Mysteries. But, let us 
recall a few objections that came from recognized men of Science; 
from astronomers and physicists of eminence, who rejected the theory 
of rotation, as well as that of gravitation. Thus one reads in the 
French Encyclopaedia that " Science agrees, in the face of all its re- 
presentatives, thiat it is impossible to explain the physical origin of the 
rotatory motion of the solar system." 

If the question is asked, " what causes rotation ? " we are answered : 



" It is the centrifugal Force." " And this force, what is it that pro- 
duces it?" "The force of rotation," is the grave answer."* It will 
be well, perhaps, to examine both these theories as being directly or 
indirectly connected. 



752. But tee Astronomit dm Moygn Ag*, 
by Dclambrc 

753. In the aeiiae, of cotine» of matter 
existiof in states unknown to Science. (See 
**/«» UnpfiUd/' Vol I. pp. 270 to 271.) 

754. World-Lift, p. 554. 

755. Godefrof, Cotmogonit d* la Rivikh 
Hen. We shall be taken to task for contra- 
dictkm. It will be said that while we deny 
G0d, we admit Souls and optrativt SpiriU, 



and quote from Roman Catholic bigoted 
writers in support of our argument. To 
this we reply: " We deny the antkropomor- 
Pkie god of the Bfonotheists, but never the 
Divine Principle in nature. We combat Pro- 
tesUnte and Roman Catholics on a number 
of dogmatic theological beliefs of human and 
sectarian origin. We agree with them in 
their belief in Spirite and intelligent opera- 
tive powera, though we do not worship "An- 
gels " as the Roman Latinists do. 



500 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 



THE THEORIES OF ROTATION IN SCIENCE 

Considering that " final cause is pronounced a chimera, and the first 
Great Cause is remanded to the Sphere of the Unknown/' as a reverend 
gentleman justly complains, the ntunber of hypotheses put forward, a 
nebula in itself, is most remarkable. The profane student is perplexed, 
and does not know in which of the theories of exact science he has to 
believe. Here we have h)rpotheses enough for every taste and power 
of brain. They are all extracted from a number of scientific volumes. 

Current Hypotheses expi^aining the Origin of Rotation 

Rotation has originated either — 

(a) By the collision of nebular masses wandering aimlessly in space; 
or by attraction, " in cases where no actual impact takes place." 

(b) ** By the tangential action of currents of nebulous matter (in the 
case of an amorphous nebula) descending from higher to lower 
levels,^** or simply by the action of the central gravity of the mass." ^*^ 

** It is a fundamental principle in physics that no rotation could be 
generated in such a mass by the action of its own parts. As well at- 
tempt to change the course of a steamer by pulling at the deck railing,** 
remarks to this Professor Winchell in World-Life. 

Hypotheses of the Origin of the Seven Planets and Coiccts 

(a) We owe the birth of the Planets (1) to an explosion of the Son 
— a parturition of its central mass;^" or (2) to some kind of disrup- 
tion of the nebular rings. 

(&) " The Comets are strangers to oiu- planetary system" {Laplace). 
" The Comets are undeniably generated in our Solar system" (Faye). 

(c) The "fixed stars are motionless " says one authority. ... "AD 
the stars are actually in motion " answers another authority. . . . 
" Undoubtedly every star is in motion " (Wolf). 

(d) " For over 350,000,000 years, the slow and majestic movement 
of the Sun around its axis has never for a moment ceased " (Le Cou- 
turier).''^* 



756. The tennt " Ufffa " and '* low ** beinc 758. If tocfa is the csk. how doc* 

only rclatiTe to the positioa of the obeenrer explain the ooinptratiTely wnaJX tim of Ac 



ki Space, anj nae of thoae terms tending to planets nearest the Sun? The theory of 
convey the impression that they stand for meteoric agfregation is only a step fsitkcr 
abstract realities, is necesaarily falladons. from tmth than the nebolar coooeption. md 

717. Jacob Ennis, The Origim of the Start, has not eren the quality of the latter — to 
p. 211, 9t stq. metaphysical element 

759. Panorama det Uondrt. 



CONTRADICTORY HYPOTHESES 501 

(e) And " the sun having Alcyone in the Pleiades for the center of 
its orbit, consumes 180,000,000 of years in completing its revolution " 
(Maedler). And also, 

(/) That, " the Sun has existed no more than 15,000,000 of years, 
and will emit heat for no longer than 10,000,000 years more " {Sir W. 
Thomson* s lecture on " the latent dynamical theory regarding the prob- 
able origin, total amount of heat, and duration of the Sun," 1887). 

A few years ago this eminent Scientist was telling the world that the 
time required for the earth to cool from incipient incrustation to its pre- 
sent state, could not exceed 80,000,000 years ^•^ {Thomson and Tait). 
If the encrusted age of the world is only 40 millions, or the half of the 
duration once allowed, and the Sun's age only 15 millions, have we to 
understand that the earth was at one time independent of the Sun? 

Since the ages of the Sun, planets, and the Earth, as stated in the 
many scientific h)rpotheses of the astronomers and physicists, are given 
elsewhere {infra), we have said enough to show the disagreement 
between the ministers of modem Science. Whether we accept the fif- 
teen million years of Sir W. Thomson or the thousand millions of Mr. 
Huxley, for the rotational evolution of our solar system, it will always 
come to this: by accepting self -generated rotation for the heavenly 
bodies composed of inert matter and yet moved by their own internal 
motion, for millions of years, this teaching of Science amounts to — 

(a) An evident denial of that fundamental physical law, which 
states that " a body in motion tends constantly to inertia, (t. e., to con- 
tinue in the same state of motion or rest), unless it is stimulated into 
further action by a superior active force." 

(&) To an original impulse, which culminates in an unalterable mo- 
tion, within a resisting ether that NewTon had declared incompatible 
with that motion, 

{c) Universal gravity, which, we are taught, always tends to a center 
in rectilinear descent — alone the cause of the revolution of the whole 
solar system, which is performing an eternal double gyration, each body 
around its axis and orbit. Another occasional version is : — 

(d) A magnet in the Sun; or, the said revolution due to a magnetic 
force, which acts, just as gravitation does, in a straight line — varying 
inversely as the square of the distance (Coulomb's Law). 

{e) The whole acting under invariable and changeless laws, which 
are, nevertheless, often shown variable, as during some well-known 

760. Nahtrai Philosophy, And even on would be required for the earth to cool from 
iSbem figures Bitchof dinffreet with Thorn- » temperature of 20,000* to 200* centigrade, 
•on, and calculates that 350 million years This is also, the opinion of Helmholtz. 



502 



THE SECRET DOCTRINE 



freaks of planets and other bodies, as also when the Comets approach 
to or recede from the Sun. 

(/) A Motor Force always proportionate to the mass it is acting 
upon ; but independent of the specific nature of that mass, to which it 
is proportionate ; which amounts to sa}ring, as Le Couturier does, that, 
"without that Force independent from and of quite another nature 
than the said mass, the latter, were it as huge as Saturn, or as tiny as 
Ceres, would always fall with the same rapidity." *•* A mass, f urtfier- 
more, which derives its weight from the body on which it weighs. 

Thus neither Laplace's perceptions of a solar atmospheric fluid, 
which would extend beyond the orbits of the planets, nor Le Couturier's 
electricity, nor Foucault's heat,'** nor this, nor the other, can ever help 
any of the nimierous hypotheses about the origin and permanency of 
rotation to escape from this squirrel's wheel, any more than the theory 
of gravity itself. This mystery is the Procrustean bed of phjrsicail 
Science. If matter is, as now taught, passive, the simplest movenoent 
cannot be said to be an essential property of matter — if the latter is 
simply an inert mass. How, then, can such a complicated movement, 
compound and multiple, harmonious and equilibrated, lasting in the 
eternities for millions and millions of years, be attributed simply to its 
own inherent Force, unless the latter is an inteUigencef A physical 
will is something new — a conception that the ancients would have 
never entertained, indeed !'•• Says an astronomer: 

We talk of the weight of the heavenly bodies, but since it is recognized that 
weight decreases in proportion to the distance from the center, it becomes evident 
that at a certain distance, that weight must be forcibly reduced to Zero! Were 
there any attraction there would be equilibrium . . . And since the modem sdiool 
recognizes neither a beneath nor an above in universal space, it is not dear what 
should cause the Earth to fall, were there even no gravitation, nor attractioii."* 

Methinks the Count de Maistre was right in solving the question in 
his own theological way. He cuts the Gordian knot by saying: ** The 
planets rotate because they are made to rotate . . . and the modem 



761. Mu4i€ d€t Sci^ncM, IS Aaffut, 1857. 

762. Panorama d*s Mond€S, p. 55. 

763. For over » century all distinction 
between body and force it made away with. 
** Force it bnt the pi o|» ei ty of a body in 
motion,** tay the phytidttt; and "/t/# — 
the property of our amimal organs '^ia bat 
the retnlt of their molecular arrangement,** 
antwer the phynologittt. ** In the botom of 
that aggregate which it named planet.'* teach* 
ct Uttrft, "are developed all the foroet im> 



manent to matter ...<.#., that 
aettet in itself and throufh i$ssif the 
that are proper to it . . . and 
pr im ary, not sscondary. Soch 
property of weight, the property of 
dty, of terrettrial magnetitm, the 
of life. • • . Every planet can derdoy 
... at earth, for Jnttance, whkh hmi 
alwayt mankind on k, and now 
duUy men." . . . {Rsvus dos Di 
July 15, 1S60) 



764. CosmograpMs, 



SCIENTIFIC ABERRATIONS 503 

physical system of the universe is a physical impossibility" ^•' For did 
not Herschel say the same thing when he remarked that there is a will 
needed to impart a circular motion, and another will to restrain it?^** 
This shows and explains how a retarded planet is cunning enough to 
calculate so well its time as to hit off its arrival at the fixed minute. 
For, if Science sometimes succeeds with its great ingenuity in explain- 
ing some of such stoppages, retrograde motions, angles outside the 
orbits, &c., &c., by appearances resulting from the inequality of their 
progress and ours in the course of our mutual and respective orbits, we 
still know that there are others, and " very real and considerable devia- 
tions,'' according to Herschel, " which cannot be explained except by 
the mutual and irregular action of those planets and by the perturbing 
influence of the Sun." 

We understand, however, that there are, besides those little and ac- 
cidental perturbations, continuous perturbations called "secular" — be- 
cause of the extreme slowness with which the irregularity increases 
and affects the relations of the elliptic movement — and that these per- 
turbations can be corrected. From Newton, who found that this world 
needed repairing very often, down to Reynaud, all say the same. In 
his Ciel et Terre (p. 28), the latter speaks of — 

. . . The orbits described by the planets as being very far from immutable; 
on the contrary, subject to a perpetual mutation in their position and form, 

— all prove gravitation and the peripatetic laws to be as negligent as 
they are quick to repair their mistakes. The charge as it stands seems 
to be that 

they [the orbits] are alternately widening and narrowing, their great axis 
lengthens and diminishes, or oscillates at the same time from right to left 
around the Sun, the plane itself, in which they are situated, raising and lower- 
ing itself periodically while pivoting around itself with a kind of tremor. . . . 

To this, De Mirville, who believes in intelligent "workmen" ruling 
invisibly the solar system — as we do — observes very wittily^** . . . 

Voild, ceries, a voyage which has little in it of mechanical rigor; at the utmost, 
one could compare it to a steamer, pulled to and fro and tossed on the waves, 
retarded or accelerated, all and each of which impediments might put off its 
arrival indefinitely, were there not the intelligences of a pilot and engineers to 
catch up the time lost, and to repair the damages. . , . 

The law of gravity, however, seems to be becoming an obsolete law in 
starry heaven. At any rate those long-haired sidereal radicals, called 
comets, appear to be very poor respecters of the majesty of that law, 

765. Soiries, 766. Dit court, 165. 

767. Diuxikmt Mhnoire, " ManifestoHom HUtonqHes/' p. 272. 



504 ^HE SBCRET DOCTRINE 

and to beard it quite impudently. Nevertheless, and though presenting 
in nearly every respect " phenomena not yet fully understood/' comets 
and meteors are credited by the believers in modem Science with obey- 
ing the same laws and consisting of the same matter, ** as the Suns, 
stars and nebulae/' and even "the earth and its inhabitants" (Lai$tg).''^ 
This is what one might call taking things on trust, aye, even to blind 
faith. But exact Science is not to be questioned, and he who rejects 
the hypotheses imagined by her students — gravitation, for instance — 
would be regarded as an ignorant fool for it; yet we are told by the 
just cited author a queer legend from the scientific annals. 

The comet of 1811 had a tail 120 millions of miles in length and 15 miHions 
of miles in diameter at the widest part, while the diameter of the nucleus was 
about 127,000 miles, more than ten times that of the earth. [He tells us,] in order 
that bodies of this magnitude, passing near the earth, should not affect its motioa 
or change the length of the year by even a single second, their actual substance 
must be inconceivably rare. . . . 

It must be so indeed, yet: — 

. . . The extreme tenuity of a comet's mass is also proved by the phenomenoo 
of the tail, which, as the comet approaches the sun, is thrown out sometimes to 
a length of 90 millions of miles in a few hours. And what is remarkable, rait 

TAIL IS THBOWN OUT AGAINST TH£ fOBCt OF GRAVTrv by SOmt fepulsive forcf, 

probably electrical, so that it always points away from the sun. [I!I] . . . And 
yet, thin as the matter of comets must be, IT OBEYS THE COMMON LAW 
OF GRAVITY [If], and whether the comet revolves in an orbit within that 
of the outer planets, or shoots off into the abysses of space, and returns only 
after hundreds of years, its path is, at each instant, regulated by tht some force 
as that which causes an apple to fall to the ground,^ 

Science is like Caesar's wife, and must not be suspected — this is 
evident But it can be respectfully criticised, nevertheless. At all 
events, it may be reminded that " the apple " is a dangerous fruit For 
the second time in the history of mankind, it may become the cause of 
the FALL — this time, of " exact " Science. A comet whose tail defies 
the law of gravity right in the Sun's face can hardly be credited witti 
obeying that law. 

In a series of scientific works on Astronomy and the nebular theory, 
written between 1865 and 1866, the present writer, a poor tyro in 
Science, has coimted in a few hours, no less than thirty-nine contradict- 
ory hypotheses oflFered as explanations for the self-generated, primitive 
rotatory motion of the heavenly bodies. The writer is no a s tronomer, 
no mathematician, no scientist; but was obliged to examine these 
errors in defence of Occultism, in general, and what is still more 

76a. Mipdem Science and Modem Thougki. 769. Ihid^ p. 1C» 



THE PARADOXES OF SCIENCE 505 

important, in order to support the occult teachings concerning astro- 
nomy and Cosmology, Occultists were threatened with terrible pen- 
alties for questioning scientific truths. But now they feel braver; 
Science is less secure in its "impregnable" position than they were led 
to expect, and many of its strongholds are built on very shifting sands. 

Thus, even this poor and unscientific examination of it was useful, 
and it was certainly very instructive. We have learned a good many 
things, in fact, having studied with particular care especially those 
astronomical data that would be most likely to clash with our het- 
erodox and "superstitious" beliefs. 

So, for instance, we have found there, concerning gravitation, the 
axial and orbital motions, that synchronous movement having been once 
overcome, in the early stage — it was enough to originate a rotatory 
motion till the end of Manvantara. We have also come to know in all 
the aforesaid combinations of possibilities with regard to incipient rota- 
tion — most complicated in every case, — some of the causes to which 
ii may have been due, as well as some others to which it ought and 
should have been due, but, in some way or other, was not. Among other 
things, we were informed that incipient rotation may be provoked with 
equal ease in a mass in igneous fusion, and in one that is characterized 
by glacial opacity (Heaven and Earth). That gravitation is a law 
which nothing can overcome, but which, nevertheless, is overcome in 
and out of season by the most ordinary celestial or terrestrial bodies — 
the tails of impudent comets, for instance. That we owe the universe to 
the holy creative Trinity, called Inert Matter, Senseless Force and Blind 
Chance. Of the real essence and nature of any of these three, Science 
knows nothing, but this is a trifling detail. Ergo, we are told that, 
when a mass of cosmic or nebular matter — whose nature is unknown 
(entirely so), and which may be in a state of fusion (Laplace), or 
dark and cold (Thomson), for "this intervention of heat is itself a 
pure hypothesis" (Faye) — decides to exhibit its mechanical energy 
under the form of rotation, it acts in this wise. It (the mass) either 
bursts into spontaneous conflagration, or it remains inert, tenebrous, 
and frigid, both states being equally capable of sending it, without 
any adequate cause, spinning through space for millions of years. Its 
movements may be retrograde and they may be direct, about a hundred 
various reasons being offered for both motions, in about as many 
hypotheses. Anyhow, joining the maze of stars, whose origin belongs 
to the same miraculous and spontaneous order — for "the nebular 
theory does not profess to discover the origin of things, but only a 
stadium in material history " ( Winchell ^''^) — those millions of suns, 
planets, and satellites, composed of inert matter, will whirl on in most 

770. World-Lift. 



506 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

impressive and majestic symmetry around the firmament, moved and 
guided only, their inertia notwithstanding, "by their own internal 
motion/' 

Shall we wonder after this if learned mystics, pious Roman Catholics, 
and even such learned astronomers as were Chaubard and Godefroy,^^ 
have preferred the Kabala and the ancient systems to the modem 
dreary and contradictory exposition of the Universe? The Zohar 
makes a distinction, at any rate, between "the hajaschar ('the light 
Forces ')i the hachoser (' Reflected Lights ')» and Ac simple phenom- 
enal exteriority of their spiritual types."*** 

The question of "gravity" may now be dismissed, and other hypo- 
theses examined. That physical Science knows nothing of " Forces " is 
clear. We may close the argument, however, by calling to our help one 
more man of Science — Professor Jaiunes, Member of the Academy of 
Medicine at Montpellier. Says this learned man, speaking of Forces: 

A cause is that which is essentially acting in the genealogy of phenomena, in 
every production as in every modification. I said that activity (or Force) was 
invisible. ... To suppose it corporeal and residing in the properties of matter 
would be a gratuitous hypothesis. ... To reduce all the causes to God . . . 
would amount to embarrassing oneself with a hypothesis hostile to many verities. 
But to speak of a plurality of forces proceeding from the Deity and possessing 
inherent powers of their own, is not unreasonable . . . and I am disposed to 
admit phenomena produced by intermediate agents called Forces or Secondaiy 
Agents. The distinction of Forces is the principle of the division of Sciences; 
so many real and separate forces, so many mother-Sciences. . . . No: Forces 
are not suppositions and abstractions, but realities, and the only acting realities 
whose attributes can be determined with the help of direct observatioQ and 
induction."* 



VI 

THE MASKS OF SCIENCE 

PHYSICS OR METAPHYSICS? 

Ip there is anything on earth like progress, Science will some day 
have to give up, nolens volens, such monstrous ideas as her (^ysical, 
self -guiding laws — void of soul and Spirit — and then turn to Ae 

771. L'Unwtt gxpliqui per la Rivila- 772. See K6balc Dtmudf, II. 67. 

Hen, and Cotmcgonit dt la RivitaHon, Bat 773. " Sur la DisHmctien 4n Ferett," 

■ee De Mirrille's Dtuxihne Uhtwirt, The publisbed in the Miimoirt* d€ rAemdhmt 

Author, a terrible enemy of Occultism, was dts Sciences dt MonifMiir, Vol. II. 

yet one who wrote freat trutha. I. 1854. 



ACADEMICAL MISNOMERS 507 

occult teachings. It has done so already, however altered arc the title- 
page and revised editions of the Scientific Catechism. It is now over 
half a century since, in comparing modem with ancient thought, it has 
been found that, however different our philosophy may appear from 
that of OUT ancestors, it is, nevertheless, composed only of additions 
and subtractions taken from the old philosophy and transmitted drop 
by drop through the filter of antecedents. 

This fact was well known to Faraday, and other eminent men of 
Science. Atoms, Ether, evolution itself — all comes to modem Science 
from ancient notions, all is based on the conceptions of the archaic 
nations. " Conceptions " for the profane, under the shape of allegories ; 
plain tmths taught during the Initiations to the elect, which truths 
have been partially divulged through Greek writers and have descended 
to us. This does not mean that Occultism has ever had the same views 
on matter, atoms and ether as found in the exotericism of the classical 
Greek writers. Yet, if we believe Mr. Tyndall, even Faraday was an 
Aristotelean, and an Agnostic more than a materialist. In his Faraday, 
as a Discoverer''''^ the author shows the great physicist using "old 
reflections of Aristotle" which are "concisely found in some of his 
works." Faraday, Boscovich, and all others, however, who sec, in 
the atoms and molecules, " centers of force," and in the corresponding 
element force, an entity by itsblp, are far nearer the tmth, perchance, 
than those, who, denouncing them, denounce at the same time the 
"old corpuscular Pythagorean theory" (one, by the way, which hat 
never passed to posterity as the great phibsopher really taught it), 
on the ground of its " delusion that the conceptual elements of matter 
can be grasped as separate and real entities." 

The chief and most fatal mistake and fallacy made by Science, in 
the view of the Occultists, lies in the idea of the possibility of such a 
thing as inorganic, or dead matter, in nature. If anything dead or 
inorganic capable of transformation or change? Occultism aiks. And 
is there anything under the sun which remains immutable or changelefls ? 

This fallacy is nowhere better illustrated than in the scientific work 
of a German savtmt. Professor Philip Spiller/^* In this cosmological 
treatise, the author attempts to prove that " no material constituent of 
a body, no atom, is in itself originally endo^ved with force, but that 
every such atom is absolutely dead,^''* and without any power to act 
at a distance." (p. 4) 

774. Fife 123. thm ino«t «^ftv«, A wf,ti^n m % m^mm M/mHi 

775. D^r WHtmetkgr «<# Kegmiseh^ Krmft, it nv^tknUM mv4 imp<»f>#ff«M« Ut aH int^nU 

776. SooKtUac dmd iaptie* tkat it h^ »rui (nirp/*«»«, ^#v#rrS#UM, »n4 4t 1t^%0, 
been at tone tioK Inw»^ WWa, m wluc nm ptettrU^ «r« Ni «^m«I#m «l#rn«f rlKf*' 



period of 000009007? Oetal^mm mj% diM fi^m wfci/li l« m fn^iA fh*f fA thm ^liytUol 
ia an cooes vbea aottcr mpptmM intn, it lo «7« flu k^Af •mnm •W^fdUlf Aa^tA4 t4 



508 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

This statement, however, does not prevent Spiller from enunciating 
an occult doctrine and principle. He asserts the independent substan- 
tiality of force, and shows it as an "incorporeal stuflE" (unkorper- 
licher stoff) or substance. Now substance is not matter in metaphysics, 
and for argument's sake it may be granted that it is a wrong expression 
to use. But this is due to tfie poverty of European languages, and 
especially to that of scientific terms. Then this " stuff " is identified 
and connected by Spiller with the aether. Expressed in occult language 
it might be said with more correctness that this " force-substance " is 
the ever-active phenomenal positive aether — prakriti; while the omni- 
present all pervading ether is the noumenon of the former, the sub- 
stratum of 2l11, or Akaia. Nevertheless, Stallo falls foul of Spiller, as 
he does of the materialists. He is accused of " utter disregard of the 
fundamental correlation of force and matter" (of neither of which 
Science knows anything certain) . For this " hypostasized half-concept " 
is, in the view of all other physicists, not only imponderable, but desti- 
tute of cohesive, chemical, thermal, electric, and magnetic forces — of 
all of which forces — according to occultism — aether is the source 
and cause. 

Therefore, Spiller, with all his mistakes, exhibits more intuition than 
any other modem Scientist, with the exception of Dr. Richardson, per- 
haps, the theorist on the "nerve force," or Nervous Ether, also on 
"Sun Force and Earth Force." "^ For Aether, in Esotericism, is 
the very quintessence of all possible energy, and it is certainly to this 
universal agent (composed of many agents) that all the manifestatioos 
of energy in the material, psychic and spiritual worlds are due. 

What are Electricity and Light, in fact? How can Science know 
that one is a fluid and the other a " mode of motion " ? Why is it not 
made clear why a difference should be made between them, since both 
are considered force-correlations? Electricity is a fluid, we are told, 
immaterial and non-molecular (though Helmholtz thinks otherwise), 
and the proof of it is that we can bottle it up, accumulate and store it 
away. Then, it must be simply matter, and no peculiar " fluid." Nor 
is it only " a mode of motion," for motion could hardly be stored in m 
Leyden jar. As for light, it is a still more extraordinary "mode of 
motion " ; since, " marvelous as it may appear, light (also) can actually 
be stored up for use," as demonstrated by Professor Grove neariy half 
a century ago. 

Take an engraving which has been kept for some days in the dark, expose it 

tion; and the ipAdal dittmnoe between thote snow flakes or drop* of rain. Bat to phyii- 

particles in their vibratory motion is — con- cal sdenoe this will be an absurdity, 
sidered from another plane of being and 777. See Popular Scitnc^ Rtvitw, VoL 

perception — as great as that which separates V, pp. 329-34. 



THE FIXING OP UGHT 509 

to full sunshine — that is, insulate it for 15 minutes; lay it on sensitive paper 
in a dark place, and at the end of 24 hours it will have left an impression of it- 
self on the sensitive paper, the whites coming out as blacks. . . . There seems 
to be no limit for the reproduction of engravings, etc, etc . . . 

What is it that remains fixed, nailed, so to say, on the paper? It 
is a Force certainly, that fixed the thing, but what is that thing, the 
residue of which remains on the paper? 

Our learned men will get out of this through some scientific techni- 
cality; but what is it that is intercepted, so as to imprison a certain 
quantity of it on glass, paper, or wood? Is it "Motion" or is it "Force" ? 
Or shall we be told that what remains behind is the effect only of the 
force or Motion? Then what is this Force? Force or energy is a 
quality; but every quality must belong to a something, or a somebody. 
In Physics, Force is defined as " that which changes or tends to change 
any physical relation between bodies, whether mechanical, thermal, 
chemical, electrical, magnetic, etc." But it is not that " Force " or that 
"Motion" which remains behind on the paper, when the Force or 
Motion has ceased to act ; and yet something, which our physical senses 
cannot perceive, has been left there to become a cause in its turn and 
produce effects. What is it? It is not matter, as defined by Science — 
f. e. matter in any of its known states. An Alchemist would say it was 
a spiritual secretion — and would be laughed at But yet, when the 
physicist said that Electricity, stored up, was a fluid, or that light fixed 
on paper is still Sunlight — this is Science.^^' In the opinion of an 
experienced Occultist, one who has verified the whole series of Niddnas, 
of causes and effects that finally project their last effect on to this our 
plane of manifestations ; one who has traced matter back to its noume- 
non, the explanation of the physicist is like calling anger, or its effects 
— the exclamation provoked by it — a secretion or a fluid, and man, 
the cause of it — its material conductor. But, as Grove prophetically 
remarked, that day is fast approaching when it will be confessed that 
the " forces " we know of are but the phenomenal manifestations 
of realities we know nothing about, — but which were known to the 
ancients and — by them worshiped. 

He made one still more suggestive remark, however, which ought to 
have become the motto of Science, but has not Sir W. Grove said that 
" Science shouu) have neither desires nor prejudices. Truth 
should be her sole aim." 

Meanwhile, in our days, Scientists arc more self-opinionated and 

778. The newest Authoritiet have reject- their sole IdoL But, rarely, they and their 
ed these explan«tioiit ti "exploded theor- idol will one day share the fate of their 
ies," and hare now deified ** Motion " as predecessors. 



510 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

bigoted than even the clergy. For they minister to, if they do not actu- 
ally worship, " Force-Matter," which is their UnknoTvn God. And how 
unknown it is may be inferred from the many confessions of the most 
eminent physicists and biologists, with Faraday at their head Not 
only, he said, could he never presume to pronounce whether Force was 
a property or ftmction of Matter, but he actually did not know what 
was meant by the word matter. 

There was a time, he added, when he believed he knew something of 
matter. But the more he lived, and the more carefully he studied it, 
the more he became convinced of his utter ignorance of the nature of 
matter.''^* 

The Occultists are often misunderstood because, for lack of better 
terms, they apply to the essence of Force under certain aspects the 
descriptive epidiet of substance. Now the names for the varieties of 
** substance " on different planes of perception and being are legion. 
Eastern Occultism has a special appellation for each kind ; but Science 

— like England, in the recollection of a witty Frenchman, blessed with 
thirty-six religions and only one fish-sauce — has but one name for all, 
namely, " Substance." Moreover, neither the orthodox physicists nor 
their critics seem to be very certain of their premisses, and are as apt to 
confuse the effects as they do the causes. It is incorrect, for instance, 
to say, as Stallo does, that " matter can no more be realized or con- 
ceived as mere spatial presence than as a concretion of forces," or that 
" force is nothing without mass, and mass is nothing without force " 

— for one is the noumenon and the other the phenomenon. Again ; 
Schelling, when sa}dng that ** It is a mere delusion of the phantasy that 
something, we know not what, remains after we have denuded an object 
of all the predicates belonging to it " ^•^ — could never have applied the 
remark to the realm of transcendental metaphysics. It is true that pure 
force is nothing in the world of physics; it is all in the domain of 
Spirit. Says Stallo : "If we reduce the mass upon which a given force, 
however small, acts to its limit zero — or, mathematically expressed, 
until it becomes infinitely small — the consequence is that the velocity 
of the resulting motion is infinitely great, and that the ' thing ' ... is 
at any given moment neither here nor there, but everywhere — that 

779. Se« BockweU't Sltctrie ScUne§. to mj mind the a or nadeat Tiniihti mA 

This ominont oonfeMiofi wmt nude, we be- the •abttanoe contiftt of the powers ■•• 

Uere, at • Scientific Conffress at Swanses. And, indeed, what notion can we form of 

Faraday held a similar opinion, bowerer, as the nndens independent of its power* ? 

suted by Tyndall: "What do we know of What thoufht remains on whid to 1 

the atom apart from iu force? Yon imacine the imagination of an a independent o# 

a nucleus which may be called a and sur- acknowledged forces?" 
round it by forces which may be called m; 780. Schelling, Id^^n, cCc, pw III 



WHAT IS FORCE? Sll 

there is no real presence ; it is impossible, therefore, to construct matter 
by a synthesis of forces." ^" 

This may be true in the phenomenal world, inasmuch as the illusive 
reflection of the one reality of the supersensual world may appear true 
to the dwarfed conceptions of a materialist. It is absolutely incorrect 
when the argument is applied to things, in what the Kabalists call the 
supermundane spheres. Inertia, so called, "is force" according to 
Newton,^** and for the student of Esoteric Sciences the greatest of the 
occult forces. A body may be considered divorced from its relations 
with other bodies — which, according to physical and mechanical scien- 
ces, give rise to its attributes — only conceptually, only on this plane of 
illusicm. In fact, it can never be so detached : death itself being unable 
to detach it from its relation with the Universal forces, of which the 
one Force or Life is the synthesis: but simply continues such inter- 
relation on another plane. But what, if Stallo is right, can Dr. James 
Croll mean when, in speaking " On the Transformation of Gravity."^" 
he brings forward the views advocated by Faraday, Waterston, and 
others? For he szys very plainly that gravity — 

... is a force penradiiig Space external to bodies, and that, on the nntttial ap* 
proach of the bodies, the force is not tacraued, as is generaUr supposed, bttt the 
bodies merely pass into a place where the force exists with greater intensity, , , , 

No one will deny diat a force (whether gravity, electricity, or any 
other force) which exxsU ouUidt of the bodies and in open space — be 
it etfier or vacmnn — must be something, and not a pure nothing, wbeo 
conceived apart from a mass. Otherwise it could hardly exi^t in one 
place with a greaitr and in another with reduced *^ intensity,'* G. K 
Him dedarcs the same in his Theorie Micanique de fUntvers. He 
tries to demonstrate that the atom of the chtm:vti i* r^A an entity of 
pure co u f c i Ui on^ or simply an explkatsvc device, b^jt that it ex:^-ts 
really, diat its vohnse is onalterabic, and that convt/f'.iwniy it is not 
dastic ( !!). ** Force, therefore, is not in the atom; it is m the spaee 
wfaicli sepaxmtes the at 9ms from each other!* 

The aborc-cited riewf, ex;;rtrtvbd by two mtn of S'itnoe of great 
in their respectrre c^>trrtriet- throw that H it oot in the leat< 
to speak of the trbvtirriiJit t of the v>-ci?>:^ Forces. S u.V- 
ject to sooie f uii a e cped5c xacae. this force it s^thtUisue ot tofne kisvi, 
and can be pgrrrrng eit-e: aa^ ^^j^'tJir/i ooc c«r ?y,ytryjt » ;!I be the £n< 
to re-ado^ the dcri-it^ racne of ^iLio^lfcVjsL Viha^rk-tt- vrscj te ii» 
fatnre sanie grrea to h. to Tzxthzrjt^ *JxisX i^/rot 4o« «.^/ r^rtl^ie ic the 
atoaas* bet ochr r: * fc-pite l»etT«t?«; thtr^." irair be ^r^^s^^, eaor^.; 

it tt not trae, T'^ the tr-riC o-f ai. Occ.:J^*-8t it n lie w^> I'lj 

7tl. rmuu^t^pHMii Mtg/mmr^ )dU ::>. ^2. 



512 



THE SECRET DOCTRINE 



that water does not reside in the drops of which the ocean is composed, 
but only in the space between those drops ! 

The objection made that there are two distinct schools of physicists, 
by one of which " the force is assumed to be an independent substantial 
entity, which is not a property of matter nor is it essentially related to 
matter," ^'^ is hardly likely to help the profane to any clearer under- 
standing. It is, on the contrary, still more calculated to throw the ques- 
tion into greater confusion than ever. For Force is, then, neither this 
nor the other. By viewing it as '' an independent substantial entity," 
the theory extends the right hand of fellowship to Occultism, while 
the strange contradictory idea that it is not related to matter "other- 
wise than by its power to act upon it," ^^ leads physical science to the 
most absurd contradictory hypotheses. Whether " force " or " motion," 
(Occultism, seeing no diflference between the two, never attempts to 
separate them) it cannot act for the adherents of the atomo-mechanical 
theory one way, and for those of the rival school in another way. Nor 
can the atoms be, in one case, absolutely uniform in size and weighty and 
in another, vary in their weight (Avogadro's law). For, in the words 
of the same able critic : 

. . . While the absolute equality of the primordial units of mass is thus an 
essential part of the very foundations of the mechanical theory, the whole rood- 
em Science of chemistry is based upon a principle directly subversive of it^ 
a principle of which it has recently been said that "it holds the same place in 
chemistry that the law of gravitation does in astronomy.""* This principle b 
known as the law of Avogadro or Ampere.'*' 

This shows that either modem chemistry or modem physics is entirely 
wrong in its respective fundamental principles. For if the assumption 
of atoms of different specific gravities on the basis of the atomic theory 
in physics is deemed absurd, and chemistry meets, nevertheless, on its 
opposite basis (in the question of the formation and transformation of 
chemical compounds) with " unfailing experimental verification," then 
it becomes apparent that it is the atomo-mechanical theory which is 



784. Concepts of Modem Physics, xxxi. 
Introductory to the 2nd edition. 

785. Loc. cU, 

786. J. P. Cboke, Ths New Chemistry, 
p. 13. 

787. " It imports that equal Tolumet of 
all aubatanoea, when in the gaseoua atate, 
and under like condkiona of pretaure and 
temperature, contain the same number of 
moleculea — whence it followa that the 
weighta of the moleculea are proportional to 
the ipccific gravities of the gases; that 
therefore, theae being different, the weighta 



and i0- 



of the moleculea are different also; 
aamudi aa the moleculea of certain 
tary aubstanoea are mo net o mie ( 
but one atom each) while the molecvles 
Yarioua other aubstanoea contain 
number of atoma, that the 
of such substancea are of different 
(Concepu of Modem Physics, p. 34). 
shown further on in the same to1i 
cardinal principle of taoi 
chemiatnr is in utter atU irreconc i lab l e 
flict with the first proposition of ths 
mechanicai theory — namelr, the 
equality of the primordial nnica of 



of 
of 



Aa 



THfiY AGRSE TO mSAGRtt ||J 

untenable. The explanations of the latter, that ''the dlfTercncei o( 
weight are only differences of density, and difference!! of dennlty ftro 
differences of distance between the particles contained in a given npftce/' 
are not really valid, because, before a physicist can argue in hl« drfonue 
that " as in the atom there is no multiplicity of particles and no void 
space: hence differences of density or weight are impoHnlblc In tho 
case of atoms," he must first know what an atom it, in reality, and llmi 
he cannot know. He must bring it under the obicrvation of ai IfiaJil 
one of his physical senses — and that he cannot do: tor the »»lin(>l« 
reason that no one has ever seen, smelt, heard, touched r)r tasted nn 
"atom." The atom belongs wholly to the domain of metapliy^lcn, It 
is an entified abstraction — at any rate for physical Science - hi m1 Imti 
naught to do with physics, strictly speaking, an it can never \it \mn\\i\\i 
to the test of retort or balance. The mechanical c(mcjt\tium, xSufftior^f 
becomes a jumbk of the most conflicting theoriet and i\\\tumm%, in \\w 
minds of the many Scientists who di%2igrct on this, as (m iA\wr siit;)^/ fs ; 
the evolution of which the Eastern OccultiU, wh^i folUmh this */ it-tii^t^' 
strife, beholds in the grt2tcst bewilderment 

To conclude oa the question of grzyhy. W/w can 'v U-tt^^. \fr*r%*iu^ 
to know anyduDg certain of it? How can it nmuUim lU f//&.*f//fi Hh/\ 
its hypotheses against those of th« Oc/:?iI*it*», who- uut iu ^r*y»<y //fn'/ 
S3rmpatby and antipathy, or attracty» ziA f*r/'.\xJ4%, tjki'iAA Stf j/./i^ A 
polarity oa our terrestrial p^aaie, zcA hj %'/.r*^;;t!i /^.*t^ //;n ^ oi ,«» 
influence? How can tbcy ^jja^*x^ »;*h 'i^t ^ j*/.k\\%*^ ^^i^^tr ♦>>/ '4^/^^ 
zsDOOg tfaemsehncs? IrAxfi ^jcx btirt oi *yjt v^.<>rr*?^>*, //< 4*^ty^^ 
and in tbc sanae b e ead: rA rf-^t ;^trf*3Ct r^'^r^^t ^.'K .-f^ k ? ^ ^/ *A ♦'^ 
atoms; of tbe K^atsc '^jsrxj 'A jptii^ V '^ z^*--*/^, » /, " y/^*-'' .^* 
encrgr," so caZieri: asj-i at 'fiit tsi"j^ *."-^ \i va ^^'"A'*:^*^ v- .1 v^ 
mass being tfr-s:i*c/vi kari ^sui *w^i.;:>^ " > ^ 'y*/ v ' ^ '^ -i. ^ «/*>•- 

it at fv^r^npt . — 

Aad f=r 



And a nrjui or . i.*tfr i*^ ;. i' .' Uut 

saair tr ar/Ri. •';ir:t i-i^.-y-^ .>i^ r; /^ >.#-^^. ;*^ ^^ *.v .-y, >,*••. * 






514 YHE SECWr DOCTRINE 

assume inelasticity, or anything short of perfect elasticity of the ultimate mole- 
cules, whether of ultra mundane or mundane matter. [ ! ! ! ] ^ 

But what do the men of true Science say to all this ? By the " men 
of true Science " we mean those who care too much for truth and too 
little for their personal vanity to dogmatize on anything, as the majority 
do. There are several among them — perhaps more than dare publish 
openly their secret conclusions for fear of the cry "Stone him to death !" 
— men, whose intuitions have made them span the abyss that lies be- 
tween the terrestrial aspect of matter, and the — to us, on our plane of 
illusion — subjective, i. e, transcendentally objective substance, 
and led them to proclaim the existence of the latter. Matter, to the 
Occultist, it must be remembered, is that totality of existences in the 
Kosmos, which falls within any of the planes of possible perception. 
We are but too well aware that the orthodox theories of sound, heat 
and light, are against the occult doctrines. But, it is not enough for the 
men of Science, or their defenders, to say that they do not deny dynamic 
power to light and heat; and urge as a proof the fact that Mr. Crookes' 
radiometer has unsettled no views. If they would fathom the ultimate 
nature of these Forces, they have first to admit their substantial nature, 
however supersensuous. Neither do the Occultists deny the correct- 
ness of the vibratory theory.^** Only they limit its functions to our 
Earth — declaring its inadequacy on other planes than ours, since 
"Masters" in the Occult Sciences perceive the causes that produce 
ethereal vibrations. Were all these only the fictions of the alchemists, 
or dreams of the Mystics, such men as Paracelsus, Philalethes, Van Hel- 
mont, and so many others, would hav6 to be regarded as worse than 
visionaries : they would become impostors and deliberate mystificators. 

The Occultists are taken to task for calling the Cause of light, heat, 
sound, cohesion, magnetism, etc. etc. a substance.''** Mr. Clerk Maxwell 
has stated that the pressure of strong stmlight on a square mile is about 
3j4 lbs. It is, they are told, " the energy of the myriad ether waves " ; 
and when they call it a "substance" impinging on that area, their 
explanation is proclaimed unscientific. 

There is no justification for such an accusation. In no way ^ as 



791. PhOosopkieai MagaHme, page 321; vibraHons of the two.** It It Chit "< 
|0C. eii. tlon" that is anknown to modern SdoMC, 

792. Referrinf to the Aura, one of the jet wmt nanj timet explained by tht Al- 
Mutert ttjrt in the *'Occnlt World": chemitta. 

" How oonld you make jooraelf understood 

by, command in fact, those semi-intellifent 793. The "substance** of the Occnhiat 

forcts, whose means of communication with however, is to the most refined tuhstme* of 

us are not through spoken words but through the physicist, what radiant mtUr is to the 

sounds and colors in correlation between the leather of the Chemist's boots. 



THE MYSTIC RAYS 



SIS 



Stated more than once before now — do the Occultists dispute the 
explanations of Science, as affording a solution of the immediate objec- 
tive agencies at work. Science only errs in believing that because it 
has detected in vibratory waves the proximate cause of these phenom- 
ena, it has, therefore, revealed all that lies beyond the threshold of 
Sense. It merely traces the sequence of phenomena on a plane of effects, 
illusory projections from the region that Occultism has long since 
penetrated. And the latter maintains that those etheric tremors, are not, 
as asserted by Science, set up by the vibrations of the molecules of 
known bodies — the matter of our terrestrial objective consciousness 
— but that we must seek for the ultimate causes of light, heat, etc., 
etc. in MATTER existing in super-sensuous states — states, however, 
as fully objective to the spiritual eye of man, as a horse or a tree is 
to the ordinary mortal. Light and heat are the ghost or shadow of 
matter in motion. Such states can be perceived by the sEER or the 
Adept during the hours of trance, under the Sushumna ray — the 
first of the Seven Mystic rays of the Sun.^** 

Thus, we put forward the Occult teaching which maintains the 
reality of a super^ubstantial and supersensible essence of that Ak&ia 
(not ether, which is only an aspect of the latter), the nature of which 
cannot be inferred from its remoter manifestations — its merely phe- 
nomenal phalanx of effects — on this terrene plane. Science, on the 
contrary, informs us that heat can never be regarded as matter in any 
ccmceivable state.^*' We are also told that the two great obstacles to 
the fluid (?) theory of heat undoubtedly are : — 

(1.) The production of heat by friction — excitation of molecular 
motions. 

(2.) The conversion of heat into mechanical motion. 



794. The names of the Seven Rajrt — 
which are, Suahumna, Harikeia, Vilvakar- 
man, VUratryarchas, Sannaddha, Sarvavaau 
and Svarij — are all mytdcal, and each has 
its distinct application in a distinct state of 
consdotisness, for occult purposes. The Su- 
timmna, which, as said in the Nirukta (II. 
6), is only to light up the moon, is the ray 
nevertheless cherished by the initiated Yogis. 
The totality of the Seren Rays spread through 
the Solar system constitute, so to say, the 
physical Up6dhi (basis) of the Bthtr of 
SeUnct; in which Upidhi, light, heat, elec- 
tricity, etc, etc — the forces of orthodox 
sdenoe — correlate to produce their terres- 
trial effecta. As psychic and spiritual ef- 
fects, they emanate from, and have their 
origin in, the supra-solar Upidhi, in the 



ether of the Occultist — or Akila. 

795. To cite a most impartial critic, one 
whose authority no one can call in question, 
as a reminder to Western Dogmatists, that 
the question cannot be in any way consid- 
ered as settled: ** * There is no fundamental 
diflference between light and heat . . . each 
is merely a metamorphosis of the other. . . . 
Heat is light in complete repose. Light is 
heat in rapid motion. Directly light is com- 
bined with a body, it becomes heat; but 
when it is thrown off from that body it 
again becomes light' (Leslie's Fluid Th^ 
ory of Light and Heat,) Whtthfr this is 
trut or false ws cannot tell, and many years, 
perhaps many generations, will have to elapse 
before we shall be able to telL" (Buckle's 
History of dvUisation, Vol. Ill, p. 384.) 



516 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

The answer given is : There are fluids of various kinds. Electricity 
is called a fluid, and so was heat quite recently, but it was on the sup- 
position that heat was some imponderable substance. This was during 
the supreme and autocratic reign of matter. When the latter was 
dethroned, and motion was proclaimed the sole sovereign ruler of the 
Universe, heat became " a mode of motion." We need not despair : 
it may become something else tomorrow. Like the Universe itself, 
Science is ever becoming, and can never say, " I am that I am." On 
the other hand. Occult Science has its changeless traditions from pre- 
historic times. It may err in particulars; it can never become guilty 
of a mistake in questions of Universal laws, simply because that 
Science, justly referred to by philosophy as the " divine/' was bom on 
higher planes, and was brought on Earth by beings who were wiser 
than man will be, even in the seventh Race of his Seventh Round And 
that Science maintains that Forces are not what modem learning would 
have them ; e. g. Magnetism is not a " mode of motion " ; and, in Ais 
particular case, at least, exact " modem Science " is sure to come to 
grief some day. Nothing, at the first blush, can appear more ridiculous, 
more outrageously absurd than to say, for instance: ''the Hindu ini- 
tiated Yogi knows really ten times more than the greatest European 
physicist of the ultimate nature and constitution of light — both solar 
and limar." Yet why is the Sushumna ray believed to be that ray 
which furnishes the moon with its borrowed light? Why is it "the 
ray cherished by the initiated Yogt"f Why is the moon held as the 
deity of the mind, by those Yogis? We say, because lig^t, or rather 
all its occult properties, every combination and correlation of it with 
other forces, mental, psychic, and spiritual, were perfectly known to 
the old adepts. 

Therefore, although, in its knowledge of the ultimate constitution of 
matter, or in the so-called ultimate analysis as opposed to the proximate 
in chemistry, occult science may be less well-informed as to die behav- 
ior of compound elements in various cases of physical correlations: 
still, it is immeasurably higher in its knowledge of the ultimate occult 
states of matter, and of the tme nature of matter, than all the phjrsi- 
cists and chemists of our modem day put together. 

Now, if we state the tmth openly and in full sincerity, namely, that 
the ancient Initiates had a far wider knowledge of physics — as a Sci- 
ence of Nature — than our Academies of Science, all taken together, 
possess, the statement will be characterized as an impertinence and an 
absurdity ; for physical sciences are considered to have been carried in 
our age to the apex of perfection. Hence, the twitting query — *' Can 
the Occultists meet successfully the two points, namely (a) the prodoc- 



THE CAUSBS AND THS SFKCTS M7 

tion of heat by friction — excitation of molecular motlonn; and {h) 
the conversion of heat into mechanical force, if they hold to thc^ iM 
* exploded ' theory of heat being a substance or a fluid ? " 

To answer the question, it must first be observed that the (Vcult 
Sciences do not regard either electricity or any of the forcci iiU|»po»ird 
to be generated by it, as matter, in any of the states knotm to ph^nU al 
Science; to put it more clearly, none of these " forrc»/' no cdllrd, «»*» 
either solids, gases, or fluids. If it did not look pedantic, an (HTullUt 
would even object to electricity being called a fluid -• ai it is an effcrt 
and not a cause. But its noutnenon, he would say, is a conscious cm$P, 
The same in the cases of " Force " and the " Atom/' I^t \\% m*!* wfmt 
an eminent Academician, Butlerof, the chemint, ha<l U) %^y aU/tif \\w^t* 
two abstractions. 



"What is Force?" argues this great man of %r.\tncp, ** wh^if \% \\ 
from a strictly scientific standpoint, and as warranM t/y \\w hw of um 
servation of energy? Conceptions of Force are ff^umrft f/y f^$f u^ 
ceptions of this, that, or another mode of nvAum/' Vffftr, h \hn% ztrrtpiy 
the passage of atu sUsie of motion into another state of the snmf: tf\ 
electricity, into heat and light, of heat info ^A\r\f\ fft v/rr^ rM/ 'uaU}/ 4\ 
fuDctioo, and so oil^^ The firtt tirrj* eJ^,try, ft M w;** j/rv' >/>/1 \r/ 
man oo earth it vrsist hstrt teen by {rit.^y/r, ; ^M*TyA, ^t *»» .\ 'gr^rtin, ,f .* 
beat that prodaccs hty di^tzir^-Ar^ itA Ut^jn ^f;ifA/^ ^ryj *>/♦?,/,*/ */ ,** 
no more oo earth per u thaa r>at or /.^,^ *0 an/ //'>f //^'>* 7;>/ 
are all corre!atxci« 2$ ioeace Msnx, 



week, •» «9«sac 'A wtam y/m*r '^^ */'^^^ , *- *^i\ % * ^ -y v'X/ 

Vy ^ce Aemninme*' viih ixi/t f. ir.«i"Voi '-r ^-/.y^n/'. »* <y*^^ "/' ti^ -*i 
sc "lie ma- Ta -Jmr*. wi^n vi*» "txJ*» V « 4j^^,*^.a*-0^ -i,.,^» «;# ^ -,/ 

^7^ aiK3r, "iier?* vi * t*^ « y-^ <*' y* *« #/*»/ ■# Vx ^ *./-^.^^« ^m /t 

u tie ti'-vmr* t:,;;* i-r". .-.- 




•>f <-^ 


'*'^' ^ m /-'i r V*. 


* ' 


■^ -, *■ ••y* - jw 


rr*'. .-.- -'« 


•4 • rt r^^e •*•-* 


■ 


^ ^ T, ,- ^ 


>.« ^^ 


• « ^a^:^^ «•#•"* 


'^^ 


* * * "^V *-"• 


«» \m9 


'"' : « -- * 


^" 





518 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

result of that diversity. From such point of view force is not the cause of 
motion, but a result, while the cause of that force, or forces, is not the substance 
or matter, but motion itself. Matter thus must be laid aside, and with it the 
basic principle of materialism, which has become unnecessary, as force brought 
down to a state of motion can give no idea of the substance. If force is the 
result of motion, then it becomes incomprehensible why that motion should be- 
come witness to matter and not to Spirit or a Spiritual essence. True, our 
reason cannot conceive of a motion minus something moving (and our reason 
is right) ; but the nature or esse of that something moving remains to Science 
entirely unknown; and the Spiritualist, in such case, has as much right to 
attribute it to a "Spirit," as a Materialist to creative and all-potential matter. 
A Materialist has no special privileges in this instance, nor can he claim any. 
The law of the conservation of energy, as thus seen, is shown to be illegitimate 
in its pretensions and claims in this case. The " great dog^ma " — no force with- 
out matter and no matter without force — falls to the ground, and loses entirely 
the solemn significance with which materialism has tried to invest it The con- 
ception of force still gives no idea of matter and compels us in no way to see 
in it "the origin of all origins.""* 

We are assured that real science is not materialistic; and our own 
conviction tells us that it cannot be so, when its learning is real. There 
is a good reason for it, well defined by some physicists and chemists 
themselves. Natural sciences cannot go hand in hand with materialism. 
To be at the height of their calling, men of science have to reject the 
very possibility of materialistic doctrines having aught to do with the 
atomic theory ; and we find that Lange, Butlerof , Du Bois Reymond, — 
the latter probably unconsciously — and several others, have proved it 
And it is, furthermore, demonstrated by the fact, that Kanada in India, 
and Leukippos, Demokritos, and after them Epicurus — the earliest 
atomists in Europe — while propagating their doctrine of definite pro- 
portions, believed in Gods or supersensuous entities, at the same time. 
Their ideas upon matter thus differed from those now prevalent Wc 
must be allowed to make our statement clearer in a short synopsis of 
the ancient and modem views of philosophy upon atoms, and thus 
prove that the atomic theory kills Materialism. 

From the standpoint of Materialism, which reduces the beginnings of 
all to matter, the Universe consists, in its fulness, of atoms and vacuity. 
Even leaving aside the axiom — now absolutely demonstrated by tele- 
scope and microscope — taught by the ancients, that nature abhors 
vacuum, what is an atom ? " It is, we are answered by Science," writes 
Professor Butlerof, " the limited division of substance, the indivisible 
particle of matter. To admit the divisibility of the atom, amounts to 
an admission of an infinite divisibility of substance, which is equivalent 

798. Scientific Letters, Profcttor BttUerof. 



THE VICIOUS CIRCLE S19 

to reducing substance to nihil, a nothingness. Owing to a feeling of 
self-preservation alone, materialism cannot admit infinite divisibility; 
otherwise, it would have to bid farewell for ever to its basic principle 
and thus sign its own death-warrant." Buchner, for instance, like a 
true dogmatist in materialism, declares that " to accept infinite divisi- 
bility is absurd, and amounts to doubting the very existence of matter." 
The Atom is indivisible then, saith Materialism? Very well. Butlcrof 
writes: 

See now what a curious contradiction this fundamental principle of the mater- 
ialists is leading them into. The atom is indivisible, and at the same time we 
know it to be elastic. An attempt to deprive it of elasticity is unthinkable; it 
would amount to an absurdity. Absolutely non-elastic atoms could never exhibit 
a single one of those numerous phenomena that are attributed to their correto' 
tions. Without any elasticity, the atoms could not manifest their energy, and the 
substance of the materialists would remain weeded of every force. Therefore, 
if the Universe is composed of atoms, then those atoms must be elastic. It i$ 
here that we meet with an insuperable obstacle. For, what are the conditions 
requisite for the manifestation of elasticity? An elastic ball, when striking 
against an obstacle, is flattened and contracts, which it would be impotiible for 
it to do, were not that ball to consist of partsdes, the relative potition of which 
experiences at the time of the blow a te m porary change. This may be said of 
elasticity in general; no dastictty h possible without change with re$pcct to 
the position of the compound partides of an elastic body. This means that 
the elastic body is dxangefol and consists of particles, or, in other word*, thai 
elasticity can pertain only to those bodies thai are ^visible. And tlie at/>m is 
elastic 



This is sufficient to show bow absurd arc the %mu]tAsynrAi% z4mhkum% 
of the non-divisibility and elasticity of the atr.^, T\i*t zi/Att i$ rlatiK, 
ergo, the atom b divisible, and irru%t conibiH of j/arti'-W, f^r of iuh- 
atoms. And these -»fr-atoms? They are ei*h*rr tifm ^hi^i'v:, un4 in ^iu h 
case Acy r epre s ent no dynairac ijnyjrtdry.^, ^/r, th«ry ar*' el/uti<: »lv;; 
and in that case, Aer, too. are %*^j]trX to ^ivhiUhiy, And O/ue a4 
infinitum. But infinite divitibilftY of alorr>t r^ryylv* tr^d^Ur ifiV/ »if/;j/.*' 
centers of force, Le^ precha'fcs trie po\v v!;^y of v^i'>*iv)r>^ tt*'4^^n h% 
an objective sidKta&oc. 

This vidous drde is fataJ to nsiV-rlt; vf;. J* IfA* H^lf -i-u^^;* m 
its own nets, and no itf-oe i* vvv-Vit i^/r r* ov*^ of 0^ /^,1« ♦».!*,* jf H 
says diat the atom is inc-A-^roj*:, ♦fj*-T; t* y^ ^' \ -^f* o^«: ■^*".*t M'>['>ty #« 
the awkward question : "HowO'.*^ tV ■/•* >'*'»^ fv/y« ** ** t t^./^ m^^A 
bow do its forvcs corr*flatt? ^* wvrX V'. '♦ '^i >'///* ***•/ ^v« *•- 'i* 
atoms, is Hke an engine v^-'iv^ ^v^-.** , t* .i /*.'//*♦*•'* ^/ ****''vl 



799. f«M«#i!^ Lrtim04, l>ar«*^'> 



520 ' THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

Accept the explanations and teachings of Occultism, and, the blind 
inertia of physical Science being replaced by the intelligent active Pow- 
ers behind the veil of matter, motion and inertia become subservient 
to those Powers. It is on the doctrine of the illusive nature of matter, 
and the infinite divisibility of the atom, that the whole science of Occult- 
ism is built. It opens limitless horizons to substance informed by the 
divine breath of its soul in every possible state of tenuity, states still 
undreamt of by the most spiritually disposed chemists and physicists. 

The above views were enunciated by an Academician, the greatest 
chemist in Russia, and a recognized authority even in Europe — the late 
Professor Butlerof. True, he was defending the phenomena of the 
Spiritualists, the materializations, so called, in which he believed as 
Professors Zollner, and Hare did, as Mr. A. Russel Wallace, Mr. W. 
Crookes, and many another Fellow of the Royal Society, do still, whe- 
ther openly or secretly. But his argument with regard to the nature 
of the essence that acts behind the physical phenomena of light, beat, 
electricity, etc., is no less scientific and authoritative for all that, and 
applies admirably to the case in hand. Science has no right to deny to 
the Occultists their claim to a more profound knowledge of the so- 
called Forces ; which, they say, are only the effects of causes generated 
by Powers, substantial, yet supersensuous, and beyond any kind of 
matter with which they (the Scientists) have hitherto become ac- 
quainted. The most science can do is to assume the attitude of agnos- 
ticism and to maintain it Then it can say : " Your case is no more 
proven than is ours; but we confess to knowing nothing in reality 
either about Force or matter, or that which lies at the bottom of the 
so-called correlations of Forces. Therefore, time alone can prove who 
is right and who is wrong. Let us wait patiently, and meanwhile 
show courtesy instead of scoffing at each other." 

But to do this requires a boundless love of truth and the surrender 
of that prestige — however false — of infallibility, which the men of 
Science have acquired among the ignorant and flippant, though cultured, 
masses of the profane. To blend the two sciences, the archaic and the 
modem, requires first of all the abandonment of the actual materialistic 
lines. It necessitates a kind of religious mysticism and even the study 
of old magic, which our Academicians will never take up. The neces- 
sity is easily explained. Just as in old alchemical works the real mean- 
ing of the substances and elements meant are concealed under the most 
ridiculous metaphors, so are the physical, psychic and spiritual natures 
of the Elements (say of fire) concealed in the Vedas, and especially in 
the Puranas, under allegories comprehensible only to the Initiates. Had 
they no meaning, then indeed all those long legends and allegories aboot 
the sacredness of the three types of fire, and the forty^ine original fires 



CHEMICAL CODS 521 

— personified by the Sons of Daksha's daughters and the Rishis, their 
husbands, " who with the first son of Brahma and his three descendants 
constitute the forty-nine fires " — would be idiotic verbiage and no more. 
But it is not so. Every fire has a distinct function and meaning in the 
worlds of the physical and the spiritual. It has, moreover, in its essen- 
tial nature a corresponding relation to one of the human psychic facul- 
ties, besides its well determined chemical and physical potencies when 
coming in contact with the terrestrially differentiated matter. Science 
has no speculations to offer upon fire per se; Occultism and ancient re- 
ligious science have. This is shown even in the meager and purposely 
veiled phraseology of the Puranas, where (as in the Vdyu Purana) 
many of the qualities of the personified fires are explained. Thus, Pavaka 
is electric, or Vaidyuta, fire ; Pavamana, the fire produced by friction, 
(or Nirmathya) : and Suchi \s solas (or Saura) fire*^ — all these three 
being the sons of Abhimanin, the Agni (fire), eldest son of Brahma and 
of Svaha. Pavaka, moreover, is made parent to Kavyavahana, the fire 
of the Pitris: iSuchi to Havyavahana — die fire of the gods ; and Pava- 
mana, to Saharaksha, the fire of the Asuras. Now all this shows that 
the writers of the Puranas were perfectly conversant with the " Forces " 
of Science and their correlations ; moreover, with the various qualities 
of the latter in their bearing upon those psychic and physical phenomena 
which receive no credit and are unknown to physical science now. Very 
naturally, when an Orientalist, — especially one with materialistic ten- 
dencies — reads that these are only appellations of fire employed in the 
invocations and rituals, he calls this " Tantrika superstition and mysti- 
fication " ; and he becomes more careful to avoid errors in spelling, than 
to give attention to the secret meaning attached to the personifications, 
or to seek their explanation in the physical correlations of forces, so 
far as known. So little credit, indeed, is given to the ancient Aryans 
for knowledge, that even such glaring passages as in Book I, chap, ii, 
Vishnu Pur&na, are left without any notice. Nevertheless, what can 
this sentence mean? — 

Then Ether, air, light, water, and earth, severally united with the properties 
of sound and other qualities, existed as distingubhable according to their pro- 
perties, . . . but possessing many and various energies and being tinconnected, 
they could not, without combination, create living beings, not having blended 
with each other. . . . Having combined . . . they assumed through mutual asso- 
ciation, the character of one mass of entire unity ; and directed by Spirit . . . etc 

This means, of course, that the writers were perfectly acquainted 
with correlation and were well posted about the origin of Kosmos from 
the "undiscrete Principle" — Avyaktanugrahena, as applied to Para- 

900. Called tbe ''drinker of waters," lolar beat cauaing water to eraporate. 



522 THE SECK^ DOCTRINE 

brahmam and Mulaprakriti conjointly, and not to "Avyakta, either 
First Cause, or matter," as Wilson gives it. The old Initiates knew of 
no " miraculous creation," but taught the evolution of atoms (on our 
physical plane), and their first differentiation from laya into the pro- 
tyle, as Mr. Crookes has suggestively named matter, or primordial sub- 
stance beyond the zero-line : — there where we place MAlaprakriH, the 
" root'Principlt " of the world stuflF and of all in the world. 

This can be easily demonstrated. Take, for instance, the newly- 
published catechism of the ViHsht&dvaita Ved&ntins, an orthodox and 
exoteric system, yet fully enunciated and taught in the Xlth century 
(its founder Ramanujacharya, being bom in a. d. 1017), at a time when 
European " Science " still believed in the squareness and flatness of the 
Earth, of Kosmas-Indikopleustes of the Vlth century. It teaches that 
before evolution began, Prakriti (Nature) was in a condition of laya or 
absolute homogeneity, as ''matter exists in two conditions, the sUkskma, 
or latent and undiflFerentiated, and the j/Au/a or differentiated condition.** 
Then it became anu, atomic. It teaches of Sudda^sattva — ^''a substance 
not subject to the qualities of matter, from which it is quite different," 
and adds that out of that substance the bodies of the inhabitants of 
Vaikunthaloka (the heaven of Vishnu), the gods, are formed. That 
every particle or atom of Prakriti contains Jiva (divine life), and is the 
iatira (body) of that Jiva which it contains, while every Jiva is in its 
turn the iarira of the supreme spirit, as "Parabrahm pervades every Jiva, 
as well as every particle of matter." Dualistic and anthropomorphic as 
may be the philosophy of the Visishtadvaita, when compared with that 
of the Advaita — the non-dualists, — it is yet supremely higher in logic 
and philosophy than the cosmogony accepted by either Christianity, or 
its great opponent, modem Science. The followers of one of the great- 
est minds that ever appeared on Earth, the Advaita Vedantins are caUed 
Atheists, because they regard all save Parabrahm, the secondless or 
Absolute Reality — as an illusion. Yet the wisest Initiates came from 
their ranks, as also the greatest Yogis. The Upanishads show that they 
most assuredly knew not only what is the causal substance in the effects 
of friction, and that their forefathers were acquainted with the confer- 
sion of heat into mechanical force, but that they were acquainted with 
the noumena of every spiritual as well as of every cosmic 



[.4i:«i|i:.4i:b.i 



Truly the young Brahman who graduates in the universities and col- 
leges of India with the highest honors ; who starts in life as an M. A. 
and an LL. B., with a tail initialed from Alpha to Omega after his name, 
and a contempt for his national gods proportioned to the honors re- 
ceived in his education in physical sciences; truly he has but to read 
in the light of the latter, and with an eye to the correlation of 



SUGGESTIVE ALI^EGORIES 



523 



Forces, certain passages in his Puranas, if he would learn how much 
more his ancestors knew than he will ever know — unless he becomes 
an occultist. Let him turn to the allegory of Pururavas and the celes- 
tial Gandharva,^^ who furnished the former with a vessel full of heav- 
enly fire. The primeval mode of obtaining fire by friction has its sci- 
entific explanation in the Vedas, and is pregnant with meaning for him 
who reads between the lines. The Tret&gni (sacred triad of fires) ob- 
tained by the attrition of sticks made of the wood of the ASvattha tree 
(the Bo-tree, of Wisdom and Knowledge) — sticks " as many finger- 
breaths long as there are syllables in the gayatri," must have a secret 
meaning, or else the writers of the Vedas and Puranas were no sacred 
writers but mystificators. That it has such a meaning, the Hindu Oc- 
cultists are a proof, and they alone are able to enlighten Science, as to 
why and how, " the fire, that was primevally one, was made threefold " 
(tretd) in our present Manvantara, by the Son of Ha (Vach), the 
primeval woman after the Deluge, the wife and daughter of Vaivasvata 
Manu. The allegory is suggestive, in whatever Purana it may be read 
and studied. 



VII 

AN ATTACK ON THE SCIENTIFIC THEORY OF FORCE 

BY A MAN OF SCIENCE 



The wise words of several (English) men of Science have now to be 
quoted in our favor. Ostracised for "principle's sake" by the few, they 
arc tacitly approved of by the many. That one of them preaches almost 
Occult doctrines, in some things identical with, and often amounting to 
a public recognition of our " Fohat and his seven Sons " — the Occult 



801. The G«ndhanra of the Veda it the 
deity who knows and revealt the aecrett of 
bcaren and divine truths to mortals. Cos- 
mieaUy — the Gandhanras are the aggregate 
powers of the solar^fire, and constitute its 
Forces; psychically — the intelligence resid* 
ing in the Sushumna, Solar ray, the highest 
of the ssvtn rays; mystically — the occult 
force in the Soma (the moon, or lunar 
plant) and the drink made of it; physically 
— the phenomenal, and spiritually — the 
Boamenal causes of Sound and the "Voice 
of Nature." Hence they are called the 



6,333 "heavenly Singers" and musicians of 
Indra's loka who personify (even in num- 
ber) the various and manifold sounds in 
Nature, both above and below. In the latter 
allegories they are said to have mystic power 
over women, and to bs fond of thtm. The 
esoteric meaning is plain. They are one of 
the forms, if not the prototypes, of Enoch's 
angels, the Sons of Ck>d, who saw that the 
daughters of men were fair (Gsn» vi), who 
married them, and taught the daughters of 
the Earth tht sscrsts of Htaven. 



524 THE SECK^ DOCTRINE 

Gandharva of the Vedas — will be recognized by every Occultist, and 
even by some profane readers. 

If the latter open Volume V of the Popular Science Review (pp. 329 
-334) , they will find in it an article on " Sun Force and Earth Forct" 
by Dr. B. W. Richardson, F. r. s., which reads as follows : — 

At this moment, when the theory of mere motion as the origin of all vanetkt 
of force is again becoming the prevailing thought, it were almost here^ to re- 
open a debate, which for a period appears, by general consent, to be virtnally 
closed; but I accept the risk, and shall state, therefore, what were the precise 
views of the immortal heretic, whose name I have whispered to the reiden, 
(Samuel Metcalfe), respecting Sun Force. Starting with the argument oo 
which nearly all physicists are agreed, that there exist in nature two agencies 
— matter which is ponderable, visible, and tangible, and a something irhidi is 
imponderable, invisible, and appreciable only by its influence on matter — Met- 
calfe maintains that the imponderable and active agency which he calls "^alori^ 
is not a mere form of motion, not a vibration amongst the particles of pon- 
derable matter, but itself a material substance flowing from the Smn throogb 
Space,*^ filling the voids between the particles of solid bodies, and cocverinK 
by sensation the property called heat The nature of caloric, or Sun-Fcrce, n 
contended for by him on the following grounds: — 

(i.) That it may be added to, and abstracted from other bodies and measttrcd 
with mathematical precision. 

(il) That it augments the volume of bodies, which are again reduced in ^ 
by its abstraction. 

(iiL) That it modifies the forms, properties, and conditions of all odier 
bodies. 

(iv.) That it passes by radiation through the most perfect vacuum^ that 
can be formed, in which it produces the same effects on the thermometer ts 
in the atmosphere. 

(v.) That it exerts mechanical and chemical forces which nothing can 
restrain, as in volcanoes, the explosion of gunpowder, and other fnlmsnstinf 
compounds. 

(vi.) That it operates in a sensible manner on the nervous Sjrstem, prodncioc 
intense pain; and when in excess, disorganization of the tissues. 

As against the vibratory theory, Metcalfe further argues that if caloric ^'^ 
a mere property or quality, it could not augment the volume of other ffoSe*'* 
for this purpose it must itself have volume, it must occupy space, and tC o"*^ 
therefore, be a material agent. If caloric were only the effect of vXrf^^ 
motion amongst the particles of ponderable matter, ii could not radiate f^^ 
hot bodies without the simultaneous transition of the vibrating particle^ ; ^ 

802. Not only " througli tpace," bat fill- ligfat. It is the aitrml fluid or * U^ J ^ 

inc crery point of our aoUr tyitcm. for it is the Kabdittt, and the ** Scrcm n,S* " 

the phTsicml retidoep to to w^f, of Ether, Sun-Ylahna. 

its timing on our plane; Ether harinf to 803. What need then, of elheHe ***^ 

senre other ootmic and terrestrial purposes for the transmisakm of light, hsal. **^ 

besides being the " agtnt " for transmitting this substance can past thm^ n um^ ^ 



DR. Richardson's her^y 525 

the fact stands out that heat can radiate from material ponderable substance 
without loss of weight of such substance. . . . With this view as to the 
material nature of caloric or sun-force; with the impression firmly fixed on 
his mind that "everything in Nature is composed of two descriptions of 
matter, the one essentially active and ethereal, the other passive and motion- 
less,"*** Metcalfe based the hypothesis that the Sun-force, or caloric, is a Self- 
active principle. For its own particles, he holds, it has repulsion; for the 
particles of all ponderable matter it has affinity; it attracts the particles of 
ponderable matter with forces which vary inversely as the squares of the dis- 
tance. It thus acts through ponderable matter. If universal space were filled 
with caloric, sun- force, alone (without ponderable matter), caloric would also 
be inactive and would constitute a boundless Ocean of powerless or quiescent 
ether, because it would then have nothing on which to act, while ponderable 
matter, however inactive of itself, has "certain properties by which it modifies 
and controls the actions of caloric, both of which are governed by immutable 
laws that have their origin in the mutual relations and specific properties of 
ttich." 

And he lays down a law which he believes is absolute, and which is thus 
expressed: — 

"By the attraction of caloric for ponderable matter, it unites and holds 
together all things; by its self-repulsive energy it separates and expands all 
things." 

This, of cotirse, is almost the occult explanation of cohesion. Dr. 
Richardson continues : — 

As I have already said, the tendency of modem teaching is to rest upon the 
hypothesis . . . that heat is motion, or, at it would, perhaps, be better stated, 
a specific force or form of motion.*" 

But this hypothesis, popular at it is, is not one that ought to be arr^pt«4 
to the exclusion of the simpler views of the material nature of tun-forr«, and 
of its influence in modifying die coodstions of matter. IV e do not y0t know 
sufficient to be dogmatic,*^ 

. . . The hypothesis of Metcalfe respecting tun-fmc* and furth Unre U 
not only very simple, bat most fascinating, , , , IfftM am two fUni^ntt In 
the Universe, the ooe b pooderabie nutter. , » » Th« %*tii%\A fl^rnrnt \% th« 
all-pervading Ether, solar-fire. It it without tuftfjht, iuhtian(0, form, or (olor; 
U is matter infimUly divisible, and H» partu^>« rrp#| #4/h tAUff, )u t^ftif U 



804. And how can H W in l hti w im ? Of/** %0*0n fmf», in §t'Ut0»i 9^»4S, M «/*frtf«(///fM« 
fondenhle mtter is the body, the sboU f4 w,*\ m*^A>%*9 ^t\ut\\At., »t,4 ^, tm 'rh« 



dM fcflule J !■■!#• wV.Mi k • Uotftogf t>*'Ai0 fifUf »Ufrts, flM 
prindpk; and this F o k m t ie Coree m tkm a*^ ^^u •#« «U 4tfl*^**"**^ft»,i,» 



Odd pripdpkv pr^mm — the aalc and rh^ »^t^ Vi^ Of th* tt *t*\^ ,m*\'m, »tt4 1**0 tftund, 

ive. On oar globa thia Subatanov la 0m fs»^t».*^„,u //«« „uf ^/.«n# »,i rK«« #rK)/li f« a 



p t iacip te of the aepaeaary RUm4n4 ^«v«f **\ m'.iffu ni tU^t '*»4t*iiHfit0 tm ki^hsf 

Eartii; ia tha atanaphcre, ic ia dwt '>< 4*r, p^*^» '/«# ^wpi4 •^.^ •"••#« mf0 fuum* 



wbkli ia tha coaaHc groaa body; m Iwr 'Vhi ^^ A^4y4 t^*t\*—if 

it b cco w ca the S^tt^ ^^dy a«d t3i«t '^4 fha N/^/ Ah U^*h*»4 •Atu^mMtm, ffc«« 



525 



THE SECR]^ DOCTRINl^ 



such that wc have no word, except ether,"* by which to express it It per- 
vades and fills space, but alone it too is quiescent — dead."" We bring together 
the two elements, the inert matter, the self -repulsive Ether [ ? ] and thereupon 
dead [?] ponderable matter is vivified; [Ponderable matter may be inert but 
never dead — this is Occnlt Law, — H. P. B.] . . . through the particles of 
the ponderable substance the ether [Ether's second principle. — H. P. B.] pene- 
trates, and, so penetrating, it combines with the ponderable particles and holds 
them in mass, holds them together in bond of union; they are dissolved in the 
Ether. 

This distribution of solid ponderable matter through ether extends, accord- 
ing to the theory before us, to everything that exists at this moment The 
ether is all-pervading. The human body itself is charged with the ether [Say 
astral light. — H. P. B.] ; its minute particles are held together by it; the plant 
is in the same condition; the most solid earth, rock, adamant, crystal, metal, 
all are the same. But there are differences in the capacities of different kinds 
of ponderable matter to receive sun-force, and upon this depends the various 
changing conditions of matter; the solid, the liquid, the gaseous condition. 
Solid bodies have attracted caloric in excess over fluid bodies, and hence their 
firm cohesion; when a portion of molten zinc is poured upon a plate of solid 
zinc, the molten zinc becomes as solid because there is a rush of caloric from 
the liquid to the solid, and in the equalization the particles, previously loose or 
liquid, are more closely brought together. . . . Metcalfe himself, dwelling on 
the above-named phenomena, and accounting for them by the unity of principle 
of action, which has already been explained, sums up his argument in very 
clear terms, in a comment on the densities of various bodies. ''Hardness and 
softness" (he says), "solidity and liquidity, are not essential conditions of 
bodies, but depend on the relative proportions of ethereal and ponderable 
matter of which they are composed. The most elastic gas may be reduced 
to the liquid form by the abstraction of caloric, and again converted into a 
firm solid, the particles of which would cling together with a force propor- 
tional to their augmented affinity for caloric On the other hand, by adding a 
sufficient quantity of the same principle to the densest metals, their attraction 
for it is diminished when they are expanded into the gaseous state, and their 
cohesion is destroyed." 

Having thus quoted at length the heterodox views of the great 
" heretic " — views that need only a little alteration of terms here and 
there, the same eminent scientist — an original and liberal thinker, un- 
deniably — proceeds to sum up those views, and continues : — 



807. Yet it it not Biker, but only one 
of the principles of Ether, the latter being 
itself one of the principles of AkIUa, 

808. And so does prdna (Jiva) penmde 
the whole living body of man; but alone, 
without having an atom to act upon, it 
would be quiescent — dead; i.e,, would be 
in laya, or as Mr. Croolces has it, " locked 
in proiyle." It is the action of Pohat upon 



a compound or even a simple body that pro- 
duces life. When a body dies it passes into 
the same polarity as its male energy and 
repels therefore the active agent, which, los- 
ing hold of the whole, fastens on the parts 
or molecules, this action being called chem- 
icaL Vishnu, the Preserver, transforms 
himself into Rudra-Siva, the Destroyer — a 
correlation seemingly unknown to Science. 



WS DISAGRM 527 

I shall not dwell at great length on this unity of sun-force and earth> 
which this theory implies. But I may add that out of it» or out of the hypo- 
thesis of mere motion as force, and of virtue without substance, we may gather> 
as the nearest possible approach to the truth on this, the most complex and 
profound of all subjects, the following inferences: — 

(a) Space, inter-stellary, inter-planetary, inter-material, inter-organic, is not 
a vacuum, but is filled with a subtle fluid or gas, which for want of a better 
term** we may still call, as the ancients did, Aith-ur — Sohr fire, AvtnntL 
This fluid, unchangeable in composition, indestructible, invisible,^ pervades 
everything and all [ponderable. — ^H. P. B.] matter,*" the pebble in the run- 
ning brook, the tree overhanging, the man looking on, is charged with the ether 
in various degree; the pebble less than the tree, the tree less than man. All 
in the planet is in like manner so charged! A world is built up in ethereal 
fluid, and moving through a sea of it 

(6) The Ether, whatever its nature is, is from the sun and from the suns;"* 
the suns are the generators of it, the store-houses of it, the diffusers of it.*^ 

(c) Without the ether there could be no motion; without it particles of 
ponderable matter could not glide over each other; without It there could be 
no impulse to excite those particles into action. 

(d) Ether determines the constitution of bodies. Were there no ether there 
could be DO change of constitution in substance; water, for instance, could 
only exist as a substance, conq»ct and insoluble beyond any conception we cotild 
form of it It coold never even be ice, never flint, never vapor, except for ether. 

(t) Ether connecU son with planet, planet with planet, man with planet, man 
with man. Without ether there could be no conmnmkation in the Umverse; 
no Vtfjait DO beat, no pbenomeooo of nodoa. 

Thus we find that Ether and elastic atofns are, in the alleged mechof^ 
teal cooccptioo of the Umrerse, the Sptrit znd Soul of Kosmos, and 
that the theory — pat it any way and tmder whatever disguise — always 
leaves a n»re widely opened issue for men of Science to speculate 
beyond the Hne drawn by modem materialism — or call it agnosticism 



S09. Vcrflr* veSgrn lbs occaSt mrwm of at fS» MmvanCMrie (Sawn frvMn dM Ctrt0tv9 
adopted! Snn, 



SlQi **Uiii hip ■hill** oqIv dorinv Mmn- SU. H«re, we deddedly bef to <fiff^ wHIi 

periods^ after wbUh it series <M>oe the learned ffratWman. Let oa w wiem V i' 



we iaao JinlapraiBrici; 'Twriaible" for ever, that tliia Aether, whether ^kiM \m me«tt hr 
in fta owa oatnee, hot aeea in it» rHIected the trrm, or I't^ lowrr i>T4n<4ple, Ether — is 



eaOed the AttnA U«bt by the apptenanr. Ak^*9 ta AdiH in the zWeiforf, 

Yet, aD itart oBa aod g ii J and the mnther M MAmirtfla ^the mn^, 

dnr wum Saaenee mown the i>^H».K*iM — " Vforher r^ the nivf^ '* 

i« it In the trAtr «5wtem, the Ami ia ber Bn*WM 

•IL One has tD add rpooderable) , ts dl*- and V^h&m, the Vrhicle, h*^«- ^^he ^h ^n- 

it fton diat Stk^r which la matter dol^; in Ko^mrnt ill 'he «tn^ arf ^he KA*»wt 



miSU thuufb a MitMialuia. rCtptt af A)n*» and «> in ynr^. It ia only 

911, The Oecolt 3dcnees leieiae th^ wh^n n-^ard^d an an :ndfvidni*l Rntify m *ti^ 



attcemeat. and mey that it ia the ion, and own KmqprfAm »hj»t ^firyrt I'fhe win) in the 
aS d^ Msns diat are fnm t$, which rmanate 7th pHnHple of the jfir^ bivly of matter. 



528 



TH1$ SECR]^ DOCTRINE 



rather, to be more correct'^* — than the majority avails itself of. 
Atoms, Ether, or both, modem speculation cannot get out of the circle 
of ancient thought; and the latter was soaked through with archaic 
occultism. Undulatory or corpuscular theory — it is all one. It is 
speculation from the aspects of phenomena, not from the knowledge 
of the essential nature of the cimse and causes. When modem Science 
has explained to its audience the late achievements of Bunsen and 
KirchoflF, and shown the seven colors, the "primary" of a ray which 
is decomposed in a fixed order on a screen ; and described the respec- 
tive lengths of luminous waves, what has it proved? It has justified 
its reputation for exactness in mathematical achievement by measuring 
even the length of a luminous wave — " varying from about seven hun- 
dren and sixty millionths of a millimeter at the red end of the spectrum 
to about three hundred and ninety-three millionths of a millimeter at 
the violet end." But when the exactness of the calculation with regard 
to the effect on the light-wave is thus vindicated, Science is forced to 
admit that the force (which is the supposed cause) is believed to pro- 
duce " inconceivably minute undulations " in some medium — " gener- 
ally regarded as identical with the ethereal medium*' ^^^ — and that 
medium itself is still only — a " hypothetical agent " I 

Auguste Comte's pessimism with respect to the impossibility of know- 
ing some day the chemical composition of the sun, has not been belied 
thirty years later by Kirchoff , as claimed. The spectroscope has helped 
us to see that the elements, with which the modem chemist is familiar, 
must in all probability be present in the sun's outward robes — not in 
the sun itself; and, taking these " robes," the solar cosmic veil, for 
the sun itself, the physicists have declared its luminosity to be due to 
combustion and flame, and have mistaken the vital principle of that 
luminary for a purely material thing, and called it " chromosphere." ®^* 
We have hypotheses and theories only so far, not law — by any means. 



814. Brutal but fnnk materialtsm is more 
honest than Janua-faoed agnosticism in our 
days. Monism is the Pecksniff of modem 
philosophy* turning a Pharisaical face to 
psychology and idealism, and its natural face 
of a Roman Augur, swelling his cheek with 
his tongue — to Materialism. The Monists 
are worse than the Materialists; because, 
while looking at the Universe and psycho- 
q>irkual man from the same negative stand* 



point, the latter put their case far 
plausibly than sceptics of Mr. Tyndall's or 
even Mr. Huxley's stamp. Herbert Spencer, 
Bain and I^ewes are more dangerous to uni- 
versal truths than Buchner. 

815. Ggology, by Professor A. WinchelL 

816. See Piv€ Years of Thsosophy — Art- 
icles: "Do the Adepts deny the nebular 
theory ? " and " Is the Sun merely a cooling 
mass?" — for the true Occult teaching. 



MYSTERIOUS SUN FLUID 529 

VIII 

LIFE, FORCE, OR GRAVITY 

The imponderable fluids have had their day; "mechanical Forces" 
are less talked about ; Science has put on a new face for this last quar- 
ter of a century; but gravitation has remained, owing its life to new 
combinations after the old ones had nearly killed it. It may answer 
scientific hypotheses very well, but the question is whether it answers 
as well to truth, and represents a fact in nature. Attraction by itself is 
not sufficient to explain merely planetary motion ; how can it presume 
to explain the rotatory motion in the infinitudes of Space? Attraction 
alone will never fill all the gaps, unless a special impulse is admitted 
for every sidereal body, and the rotation of every planet with its satel- 
lites is shown to be due to some one cause combined with attraction. 
And even then, says an astronomer,'" Science would have to name 
that cause. 

Occultism has named it for ages, and so have all the ancient philo- 
sophers; but then all such beliefs are now proclaimed exploded su- 
perstitions. The "extra cosmic" God has killed every possibility of be- 
lief in intra cosmic intelligent Forces, yet who, or what is the original 
pusher in that motion ? " When we have learned the cause, unique et 
speciale, that pushes, we will be ready to combine it with the one which 
attracts," says Francoeur.'" And again — "Attraction between the ce- 
lestial bodies is only repulsion: it is the Sun that drives them inces- 
santly onward; for otherwise, their motion would stop." 

If ever this theory of the Sun-Force being the primal cause of all 
life on earth and motion in heaven is accepted, and if that other far 
bolder one of Herschel — about certain organisms in the Sun — is ac- 
cepted even as a provisional hypothesis, then will our teachings be vin- 
dicated, and esoteric allegory shown to have anticipated Modem Sci- 
ence by millions of years, probably, for these are the Archaic teachings. 
Marttanda (the Sun) watches and threatens — without abandoning 
the central position to which his Mother, Aditi, relegated him — his 
seven brothers, the planets ; " he pursues them, turning slowly around 
himself . . . and follows them from afar, moving in the same direc- 
tion that they do, on the path that encircles their houses" — or the 
orbit.*^* It is the Sun-fluids or Emanations that impart all motion and 
awaken all into life, in the Solar System. It is attraction and repulsion, 
but not as understood by modem physics and according to the law of 
gravity ; but in harmony with the laws of Manvantaric motion designed 

817. PkilosophU NaiurflU, art 142. 818. AstronomU, p. 342. 

819. See Comment to Stanxa IV, Book L 



53d THE S^CK^T DOCTRINE 

from the early Sandhya, the Dawn of the rebuilding and higher re- 
formation of the System, ^hese laws are immutable ; but the motion 
of all the bodies, which motion is diverse and alters with every minor 
Kalpa — is regulated by the Movers, the Intelligences within the Cos- 
mic Soul. Are we so very wrong in believing all this? Well, here is 
a modem and a great man of Science who, speaking of vital electricity, 
uses language far more akin to Occultism than to modern materialistic 
thought. We refer the sceptical reader to an article on " The Source 
of Heat in the Sun," by Robert Hunt, F. R. s.,®^® who, speaking of the 
luminous envelope of the Sun and its "peculiar curdy appearance," says: 

Arago proposed that this envelope should be called the Photosphere, a name 
now generally adopted. By the elder Herschel, the surface of this photosphere 
was compared to mother-of-pearl. ... It resembles the Ocean on a tranquil 
summer-day, when its surface is slightly crisped by a gentle breeze. . . . Mr. 
Nasmyth has discovered a more remarkable condition than any that had pre- 
viously been suspected . . . objects which are peculiarly lens-shaped . . . like 
"willow leaves" . . . diflFerent in size . . . not arranged in any order . . . 
crossing each other in all directions . . . with an irregular motion among them- 
selves. ... They are seen approaching to and receding from each other, and 
sometimes assuming new angular positions, so that the appearance . . . has 
been compared to a dense shoal of fish, which, indeed, they resemble in shape. 
. . . The size of these objects gives a grand idea of the gigantic scale upon 
which physical [ ? ] operations are carried out in the sun. They cannot be less 
than 1000 miles in length, and from two to three hundred miles in breadth. 
The mosft probable conjecture which has been offered respecting those leaf 
or lens-like objects, is that the photosphere'^ is an immense ocean of gaseous 
matter [what kind of "matter"?] ... in a state of intense [apparent] incan- 
descence, and that they are perspective projections of the sheets of flame. . . . 

Solar "flames" seen through telescopes are reflections, says Occult- 
ism. But see what Occultists have to say to this in Book I. 

Whatever they may be [those sheets of flame], it is evident they are the im- 
mediate sources of solar light and heat. Here we have a surrounding envelope of 
photogenic matter,"" which pendulates with mighty energies, and by communi- 
cating its motion to the ethereal medium in stellar space, produces heat and light 
in far distant worlds. We have said that those forms have been compared to 
certain organisms, and Herschel says, "Though it would be too daring to speak 
of such organizations as partaking of life [why not?],"" yet we do know that 
vital action is competent to develop heat, light, and electricity" . . . Can it be 
that there is truth in this fine thought? May the pulsing of tntal matter in the 

820. In Popular Scienct Review, VoL IV, 822. That "matter" it just like the re- 
p. 148. flection in a mirror of the flame from a 

821. And the central mass, too, aa will ''photogenic" lamp-wick. 

be found, or rather the center of the reflec- 823. See Five Years of Theosaphy, page 

tion. 258 — answer to this speculation of Herachera. 



SUN-FORCE AND EARtH-FOROt Ml 

central Sun of our System be the source of all that life which cronnls the eorlht 
and without doubt overspreads the other planets, to which the Sun is the mighty 
Minister^ . . . 

Occultism answers these queries in the affirmative ; and Science will 
find this to be the case, one day. 
Again, on p. 156, Mr. Hunt writes: 

But regarding Life — Vital Force — as a power far more cxaltfd than pllli<»r 
light, heat, or electricity, and indeed capable of exerting a controUing power ovtf 
them all [this is absolutely occult] ... we are certainly dinpoiird to view with 
satisfaction that speculation which supposes the photosphere to be the primary 
seat of vital power, and to regard with a poetic pleasure that hypo the sis which 
refers the Solar energies to Life, 

Thus, we have an important scientific corroboration for (m^ of oiir 
fundamental dogmas — namely, that (a) the Sun is the n\oT^'\\(n\%t of 
Vital Force, which is the Noumenon of Electricity; and (b) that It \n 
from its mysterious, never-to-be- fathomed dcpthji, that \%%\\t thf;<te life 
currents which thrill through Space, as through the organi^mji of e vf ry 
living thing on Earth. For see what another eminent phyjiitian rexyn^ 
who calls this (our life-fluid) " nervoiw Ether/' Change a fr w %ft}- 
tences in the article, extracts from which now trAUm, and ytm hnvf 
another quasi-Occult treatise on Life Force, This onr^, it \% ngHm i>r. 
B. W. Richardson, F. r. s., who gives hh riew^^*** on " N>rvf/iu VAh^r/* 
as he has on " Sun-Force " and ** Earth-Porre " : — 

The idea attempted to be cooreyed by the tht;orf U, fb;*f h^fw^^n tb^ m^^ 
culcs of the matter, solid or fluid, of whirh the v^r^^fAi^ Mic^r\^^m*, nt\A, m^W4, 
of whidi aH tbc organic parts of a body are rr<n|y,v/t, fh^r* <»jrkM n r^f-r>^4 
subtle medimn, Taporoos or ga.«oa% wh^h hrA^*% fh** fr\r,Wu>^ m n crmA^^Vm 
lot Bio6oa opoo each nther, and frjt arratur<rrTu^f and f<»arr;inflf<»m^nf ^,4 k^m , 
a medinm by and tiwxBih which ail mr^w^n i^ r/mv^/M; fvy and *Hrv>iarh whi^h 
the one organ or part of rhc body is h«^ld in 'wmmiini/'#n with f)v» ^h^r ^r M, 
by whkb and throagh which the rjiiter U /:nqr w^rM '•ivnmnni4';»t^4 »;t^ fV I-/ n^ 
man: a umJi ii ii i, which, b«nif ;>r^^^nt. 'niai*'.*^ Sie >*i#^r,Trt#»n;» 'vf ^f^* */v S* 'l^- 
moBStrated^ and which, b«n^ -jniv^rviily ah^wnt. >av*^ -h#» V>/^y **J-.t,i.;y /V-^'l 

And the whnle Solar Sy^ti^m fa!!*; intr, Prv^/^y/t — fh#» ^^infhr^ rr-^^hf 
have 2ddciL Bat let as r<fart rir*her : 

... I ose the wont Eth^r in t-; ^*m#^%I s*»nc^ ^q rri*»»tnnflr ;» /*f^ •'/■•f. r^fyvf 

0«S or gaseOlU mattcT. I IV* :t. n .hr>r* :%q -^^ ^^t-^n^>m*if K^, f ^S^t* ■»#. 

speaks of the Ether -"vf Spar^ V ^'iirli i4» -h^stk; ^ itiM> vi*- -v^'if^'-''^! ♦i**/*^^**^ 
. . . When r 4peak it i i»*»r7/ia« /jh^r T 1/% ir»f -r^v-^- -'i.^t -%^ M:i<»f « «/;'f«*r^f 
m ncrvnua flnmirr only I Vii^-r** -r iiy "li^t f ;« ^ ryriii -y^^*- %f :.^ -t**^ ^v*^ 

and ^e^^lhlliti*^ « Ii^ '^^r *r^^*. <h^ -ja^^^ ,nt^ *n i-rTi ;>/>«-*- ^r/f 



*^i0mr0 ^0*'i^m ml 0, ;> ;»n- t 



532 'THE SECEBT DOCTRINE 

as the nervous ether is, according to my view, a direct product from blood, to 
we may look upon it as part of the atmosphere of the blood.... The evidence 
in favor of the existence of an elastic medium pervading the nervous matter and 
capable of being influenced by simple pressure is all-convincing. ... In nervous 
structure there is, unquestionably, a true nervous fluid, as our prtdeceuors 
taught.*^ The precise chemical [ ? ] "" composition of this fluid is not yet wdl 
known; the physical characters of it have been little studied. Whether it moves 
in currents, we do not know; whether it circulates, we do not know; whether 
it is formed in the centers and passes from them to the nerves, or whether it is 
formed everywhere where blood enters nerve, we do not know. The exact uses 
of the fluid we do not consequently know. It occurs to my mind, however, that 
the veritable fluid of nervous matter is not of itself sufficient to act as the subtle 
medium that connects the outer with the inner universe of man and animal I 
think — and this is the modification I suggest to the older theory — there must be 
another form of matter present during life; a matter which exists in the condi- 
tion of vapor or gas, which pervades the whole nervous organism, surrounds as 
an enveloping atmosphere each molecule of nervous structure, and is the med- 
ium of all motion, communicated to and from the nervous centers. . . . When 
it is once fairly presented to the mind that during life there is in the animal body 
a finely diffused form of matter, a vapor filling every part — and even stored in 
some parts; a matter constantly renewed by the vital chemistry; a matter is 
easily disposed of as the breath, after it has served its purpose — a new flood of 
light breaks on the Intelligence. . . . 

A new flood of light is certainly thrown on the wisdom of ancient 
and medieval Occultism and its votaries. For Paracelsus wrote the 
same thing more than three hundred years ago, namely, in the six- 
teenth century, as follows: — 

The whole of the Microcosm is potentially contained in the Liquor Vitas, i 
nerve fluid ... in which is contained the nature, quality, character, and essence 
of beings. ... (De Generatione Hominis). . . . The Archaeus or Liquor Vita 
is an essence that is equally distributed in all parts of the human body. . . . The 
Spiritus Vitae takes its origin from the Spiritus Mundi. Being an emanation of 
the latter, it contains the elements of all cosmic influences, and is therefore the 
cause by which the action of the stars [cosmic forces] upon the invisible bodj 
of man [his vital lingaiarira] may be explained. {De Viribus Membrontm)^ 

Had Dr. Richardson studied all the secret works of Paracelsus, he 
would not have been obliged to confess so often — "we do not know" 
..." it is not known to us " . . . etc., etc. Nor would he hare 
ever pronounced the following sentence, recanting the best portions of 
his independent rediscovery, in which he says:'** 

824. Panoelsui for one, who called it man like a laminoaa ipbefc ** . . . u^ 
liquor vitag, and Archotus, ParaceUut in Faragrammm. 

826. " This vital force . . . radiates aronnd 828. Paft 184. 



PANTHEISM OR MONOTHEISM 533 

It may be urged that in this line of thought is included no more than the 
theory of the existence of the ether . . . supposed to pervade space. . . . 
It may be said that this universal ether pervades all the organism of the animal 
body as from without, and as part of every organization. This view would 
be Pantheism physically discovered if it were true [!!]. It fails to be true 
because it would destroy the individuality of every individual sense. . . . 

We fail to see it, and we know it is not so. Pantheism may 
be "physically rediscovered," It was known, seen, and felt by the 
whole of antiquity. Pantheism manifests itself in the vast expanse of 
the starry heavens, in the breathing of the seas and oceans and the 
quiver of life of the smallest blade of grass. Philosophy rejects one 
finite and imperfect God in the universe, as the anthropomorphic deity 
of the monotheist is represented by his followers. It repudiates in its 
name of Philo-Theo-Sophia the grotesque idea that Infinite, Absolute 
Deity should, or rather could, have any, whether direct or indirect, re- 
lation to finite illusive evolutions of matter, and therefore cannot im- 
agine a universe outside that Deity, or the latter absent from the small- 
est speck of animate or inanimate substance.'** Why either the Ether 
of Space, or "nervous Ether" should "destroy the individuality of every 
sense" seems incomprehensible for one acquainted with the real nature 
of that "nervous ether" under its Sanskrit, or rather esoteric and 
Kabalistic name. Dr. Richardson agrees that — 

If we did not individually produce the medium of communication between 
ourselves and the outer world, if it were produced from without and adapted 
to one kind of vibration alone, there were fewer senses required than we possess : 
for, taking two illustrations only — ether of light is not adapted for sound, and 
yet we hear as well as see; while air, the medium of motion of sound, is not 
the medium of light, and yet we see and hear. 

This is not so. The opinion that " Pantheism fails to be true because 
it would destroy the individuality of every individual sense " shows that 
all the conclusions of the learned doctor are based on the modem phys- 
ical theories, though he would fain reform them. But he will find it 
impossible to do this unless he allows the existence of spiritual senses 
to replace the gradual atrophy of the physical. " We see and hear," 
in accordance (of course in Dr. Richardson's mind) with the explana- 
tions of the phenomena of sight and hearing, by that same materialistic 

829. Thii does not mean that every buah, the ever becoming; and alto that every inch 

tree or stone U God or a god; but only that speck individually, and Kosmos collectively, 

every speck of the manifested materUl of is an aspect and a reminder of that univer- 

Kosmos belongs to and is the substance of sal 0»# Soul^vthlch philosophy refuses to 

" God." however low it may have fallen in call God, thus limiting the eternal and ever- 

its cycHc gyration through the Eternities of present root and essence. 



534 THE SECKET DOCTRINE 

science which postulates that we cannot see and hear otherwise. The 
Occultists and mystics know better. The Vedic Aryans were as 
familiar with the mysteries of sound and color as our physiologists arc 
on the physical plane, but they had mastered the secrets of both on 
planes inaccessible to the materialist. They knew of a double set of 
senses ; spiritual and material. In a man who is deprived of one or 
more senses, the remaining become the more developed : ^. g,, the blind 
man will recover his sight through the senses of touch, of hearing, etc., 
and he who is deaf will be able to hear through sight, by seeing audibly 
the words uttered by the lips and mouth of the speaker. But these are 
cases that belong to the world of matter still. The spiritual senses, 
those that act on a higher plane of consciousness are rejected a priori 
by physiology because the latter is ignorant of the sacred science. It 
limits the action of ether to vibrations, and, dividing it from air — 
though air is simply differentiated and compound ether — makes it as- 
sume functions to fit in with the special theories of the ph)rsiol(^t 
But there is more real science in the teachings of the Upanishads when 
these are correctly understood, than the Orientalists, who do not under- 
stand them at all, are ready to admit. Mental as well as physical cor- 
relations of the seven senses (seven on the physical and seven on the 
mental planes) are clearly explained and defined in the Vedas, and 
especially in the Upanishad called Anu^d: " The indestructible and 
the destructible, such is the double manifestation of the Self. Of these 
the indestructible is the existent (the true essence or nature of Self, the 
underlying principles). The manifestation as an individual (or entity) 
is called the destructible." "•* Thus speaks the Ascetic in AnugitA; 
and also: " Every one who is twice-born [initiated] knows such is the 
teaching of the ancients. . . . Space is the first entity. . . . Now 
Space [Akaia, or the noumenon of Ether] has one quality . . . and 
that is sound only . . . and the qualities of sound are Shadga, Risha- 
bha, Gandhara, Madhyama, Panchama, and beyond these five Nishada 
and Dhaivata" ; (the Hindii gamut). These seven notes of the scale are 
the principles of sound.'*® The qualities of every Element, as of every 
sense, are septenary, and to judge and dogmatize on them from thdr 
manifestation (likewise sevenfold in itself) on the material or objective 
plane above is quite arbitrary. For it is only by the Self emancipating 
itself from these (seven) causes of illusion that one acquires the know- 
ledge (secret wisdom) of the qualities of objects of sense on their dual 
plane of manifestation — the visible and the invisible. Thus it is said: 

State this wonderful mystery. . . . Hear the assignment of causes exhaust- 
ively. The nose, and the tongue, and the eye, and the skin, and the ear as 

829a. Chap. xffl. 830. Vid^ cfa. xxxr of Awm^m. 



THE SEVEN PHYSICAL SENSES 



535 



the fifth [organ of sense]. Mind and Understanding,"' these seven [senses] 
should be understood to be the causes of (the knowledge of their) qualities. 
Smell, and taste, and color, sound, and touch as the fifth, the object of the 
mental operation, and the object of the Understanding [the highest spiritual 
sense or perception], these seven are causes of action. He who smells, he who 
eats, he who sees, he who speaks, and he who hears as the fifth, he who thinks, 
and he who understands, these seven should be regarded as the causes of the 
agents.'^ These [the agents] being possessed of qualities (sattva, rajas, tatnas), 
enjoy their own qualities, agreeable and disagreeable.*** 

Then one reads in the Bhagavadgita^^^ the Deity (or Krishna) saying: 

. . . Only some know me truly. Earth, Water, Fire, Air, Space [or AkdJa, 
Aether], Mind, Understanding and Egoism [or the perception of all the former 
on the illusive plane]. . . . This is a lower form of my nature. Know (that 
there is) another (form of my) nature, and higher than this, which is animate, 
O you of mighty arms! and by which this Universe is upheld. . . . All this is 
woven upon me, like numbers of pearls upon a thread."" ... I am the taste in 
the water, O son of Kunti! I am the light of the sun and moon. I am . . . 
sound (" t. e., the Occult essence which underlies all these and the other qualities 
of the various things mentioned," — TransL), in space . . . the fragrant smell in 
the earth, refulgence in the fire . . . etc, etc. 



831. The division of the physical senses 
into five, comes to us from great antiquity. 
Bat while adopting the number, no modem 
philosopher has asked himself how these 
senses could exist, i, #., be perceived and 
used in a self-conscious way, unless there 
was the sixth sense, mental perception to re- 
gister and record them; and (this for the 
MeUphysidans and Occultists) the Ssvsnth 
to preserve the spiritual fruition and remem- 
brance thereof, as in a Book of Life which 
belongs to Karma. The ancients divided the 
senses into five, simply because their teach- 
ers (the Initiates) stopped at the hearing, as 
being that sense which developed in the 
physical plang (got dwarfed rather, limited 
to this plane) only at the beginning of the 
Fifth Race. (The Fourth Race already had 
begun to lose the spiritual condition, so pre- 
eminently developed in the Third Race.) 

832. The modem commentators, failing 
to comprehend the subtle meaning of the an- 
cient ScholiasU, take this sentence, "causes 
of the agents," to mean " that the powers of 
smelling, etc, when attributed to the Self, 
make him appear as an agent, as an active 
principle" (t), which is entirely fanciful. 
These "seven" are understood to be the 
caoKS of the Agents, because " the objects 



are causes, as their enjoyment causes an 
impression." It means esoterically that they, 
these seven senses, arg caused by th€ Acknts, 
which are the "deities," for what does, or 
can, the sentence which follows this one 
mean? "Thus," it is said, "these seven 
[senses] are the causes of emancipation " 
(f. e,, when these causes are made ineflfect- 
ual). " And among the learned [the wise 
Initiates] who understand the qualities which 
are in the position [in the nature, rather] 
of the deities, each in its place," means sim- 
ply that the " learned " understand the na- 
ture of the noumenoi of the various phe- 
nomena; and that " qualities," in this in- 
stance, mean the qualities of the high plan- 
etary or Elementary gods or Intelligences, 
which rule the elements and their products, 
and not at all " the senses," as the modem 
commentator thinks. For the "learned do 
not suppose their senses to have aught to 
do with them, any more than with their 
SeL»." (Vide pp. 278 and 279 of VoL 
VIII of "The Sacred Books of the Bast" 
AnugttA.) 

833. Anugttd, ch. x. 

834. Chap. viL 

835. Mundakopanishad, p. 298, 



528 



THE SECRET DOCTRINE 



rather, to be more correct'" — than the majority avails itself of. 
Atoms, Ether, or both, modem speculation cannot get out of the circle 
of ancient thought; and the latter was soaked through with archaic 
occultism. Undulatory or corpuscular theory — it is all one. It is 
speculation from the aspects of phenomena, not from the knowledge 
of the essential nature of the cimse and causes. When modem Science 
has explained to its audience the late achievements of Bunsen and 
Kirchoff, and shown the seven colors, the "primary" of a ray which 
is decomposed in a fixed order on a screen ; and described the respec- 
tive lengths of luminous waves, what has it proved? It has justified 
its reputation for exactness in mathematical achievement by measuring 
even the length of a luminous wave — " varying from about seven hun- 
dren and sixty millionths of a millimeter at the red end of the spectrum 
to about three hundred and ninety-three millionths of a millimeter at 
the violet end." But when the exactness of the calculation with regard 
to the effect on the light-wave is thus vindicated. Science is forced to 
admit that the force (which is the supposed cause) is believed to pro- 
duce " inconceivably minute undulations " in sotne medium — " gener- 
ally regarded as identical with the ethereal medium ^*^* — and that 
medium itself is still only — a " hypothetical agent " I 

Auguste Comte's pessimism with respect to the impossibility of know- 
ing some day the chemical composition of the sun, has not been belied 
thirty years later by Kirchoff, as claimed. The spectroscope has helped 
us to see that the elements, with which the modem chemist is familiar, 
must in all probability be present in the sun's outward robes — not in 
the sun itself; and, taking these " robes," the solar cosmic veil, for 
the sun itself, the physicists have declared its luminosity to be due to 
combustion and flame, and have mistaken the vital principle of that 
luminary for a purely material thing, and called it " chromosphere." •*• 
We have hypotheses and theories only so far, not law — ^by any means. 



814. Bnatml but frank mftteriaUtm is more 
bonett than Janoa-faoed agnottidam in onr 
days. Monism is the Pecksniff of modem 
philosophjt tuming a Pharisaical face to 
psjrcholofy and idealism, and its natural face 
of a Roman Augur, swelling his cheek with 
his tongue — to Materialism. The Monlstt 
are worse than the Materialists; because, 
while looking at the Universe and psycho- 
spiritual man from the same negative stand- 



point, the latter put their case far less 
plausibly than sceptics of Mr. TyiAlairs or 
even Mr. Huxley's stamp. Herbert Spcsecr. 
Bain and Lewes are more dangerous to mii- 
versal truths than Buchner. 

815. Geology, by Professor A. WlacML 

816. See Pwo Ytoirt of Thootofkj — Art^ 
icles: "Do the Adepts deny the acbakr 
theory? " and " Is the Sun merely a cooliag 

>?" — for the true Occult traHiii^. 



MYSTERIOUS SUN FLUID 529 

VIII 

LIFE, FORCE, OR GRAVITY 

The imponderable fluids have had their day; "mechanical Forces" 
are less talked about ; Science has put on a new face for this last quar- 
ter of a century ; but gravitation has remained, owing its life to new 
combinations after the old ones had nearly killed it. It may answer 
scientific hypotheses very well, but the question is whether it answers 
as well to truth, and represents a fact in nature. Attraction by itself is 
not sufficient to explain merely planetary motion ; how can it presume 
to explain the rotatory motion in the infinitudes of Space ? Attraction 
alone will never fill all the gaps, unless a special impulse is admitted 
for every sidereal body, and the rotation of every planet with its satel- 
lites is shown to be due to some one cause combined with attraction. 
And even then, says an astronomer,'^^ Science would have to name 
that cause. 

Occultism has named it for ages, and so have all the ancient philo- 
sophers; but then all such beliefs are now proclaimed exploded su- 
perstitions. The "extra cosmic" God has killed every possibility of be- 
lief in intra cosmic intelligent Forces, yet who, or what is the original 
pusher in that motion ? " When we have learned the cause, unique et 
speciale, that pushes, we will be ready to combine it with the one which 
attracts," says Francoeur.*" And again — "Attraction between the ce- 
lestial bodies is only repulsion: it is the Sun that drives them inces- 
santly onward; for otherwise, their motion would stop." 

If ever this theory of the Sun-Force being the primal cause of all 
life on earth and motion in heaven is accepted, and if that other far 
bolder one of Herschel — about certain organisms in the Sun — is ac- 
cepted even as a provisional hypothesis, then will our teachings be vin- 
dicated, and esoteric allegory shown to have anticipated Modem Sci- 
ence by millions of years, probably, for these are the Archaic teachings. 
Marttanda (the Sun) watches and threatens — without abandoning 
the central position to which his Mother, Aditi, relegated him — his 
seven brothers, the planets ; " he pursues them, turning slowly around 
himself . . . and follows them from afar, moving in the same direc- 
tion that they do, on the path that encircles their houses" — or the 
orbit.'^* It is the Sun-fluids or Emanations that impart all motion and 
awaken all into life, in the Solar System. It is attraction and repulsion, 
but not as understood by modem physics and according to the law of 
gravity ; but in harmony with the laws of Manvantaric motion designed 

817. PkUosophU NaturtlU, mrt 142. 818. AstronomU, p. 342. 

819. See Comment to Stanxa IV, Book L 



538 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

electrical action, of mechanical friction.*** It holds the nenrous system throoglH 
out in perfect tension, during states of life [true]. By exercise it is disposed 
of [rather generated] . . . and when demand for it is greater than the supply, 
its deficiency is indicated by nervous collapse or exhaustion."* It accumulates in 
the nervous centers durifig sleep, bringing them, if I may so speak, to their doe 
tone, and therewith raising the muscles to awakening and renewed life. . . . 

Just so; this is quite correct, and as comprehensible. Therefore, 

The body fully renewed by it, presents capacity for motion, fulness of form, 
life. The body bereft of it presents inertia, the configuration of shrunken death, 
the evidence of having lost something physical that was in it when it lived. 

Modem Science denies the existence of a " vital principle." This 
extract is a clear proof of its grand mistake. But this " physical some- 
thing," that we call life-fluid — the Liquor Vitae of Paracelsus — has 
not deserted the body, as Dr. Richardson thinks. It has only changed 
its state from activity to passivity, and become latent owing to the too 
morbid state of the tissues, on which it has no more hold. Once the 
rigor mortis absolute, the '' Liquor Vitae " will re-awaken into action, 
and begin its work on the atoms chemically, Brahma- Vishnu — the 
creator and the Preserver of Life — will have transformed himself 
into Siva the Destroyer. 

Lastly he writes : ^^ 

The nervous Ether may be poisoned; it may, I mean, have diffused throagli 
it, by simple gaseous diffusion, other gases or vapors derived from without; it 
may derive from within products of substances swallowed and ingested, or gases 
of decomposition produced during disease in the body itself. 

And the learned gentleman might have added on the same Occuh 
principle : " That the ' nervous Ether ' of one person can be poisoned 
by the 'nervous Ether' of another person or his auric emanations'' 
But see what Paracelsus said of " Nervous Ether " : — 

The Archaeus is of a magnetic nature, and attracts or repels other sympathetic 
or antipathetic forces belonging to the same plane. The less power of resistance 
for astral influences a person possesses, the more will he be subject to such in* 
fluences. The vital force is not enclosed in man, but radiates [within and] 
around him like a luminous sphere [aura] and it may be made to act at a 
distance. ... It may poison the essence of life [blood] and cause diseases, or 
it may purify it after it has been made impure, and restore the health.*" 

838. The conductor In the sense of UpA- ttm which gentraitd U, ttich wotild ao€ be 
dhi — a materUI or physical bask; but, as the case, surely. Hence* the latter 




the second principle of the universal Soul gency shows its independence of the 

and Vital Force in Nature, it is inUlUgently and connexion with the Sun-Porce, as Met* 

guided by the fifth principle thereof. calfe and Professor Hunt explain it. 

839. And too great an exuberance of H 840. On page 387. 

in the oerrous system leads as often to dis- 841. Paragranum; "Life cf PmmctUms.^ 

case and death. If it were the ommal sys- by Dr. F. Hartmann. 



M" 



SUN-FORC^ AND EARTH-]?0RC^ 531 

central Sun of our System be the source of all that life which crowds the earth, 
and without doubt overspreads the other planets, to which the Sun is the mighty 
Minister? , . . 

Occultism answers these queries in the affirmative ; and Science will 
find this to be the case, one day. 
Again, on p. 156, Mr. Hunt writes: 

But regarding Life — Vital Force — as a power far more exalted than either 
light, heat, or electricity, and indeed capable of exerting a controlling power over 
them all [this is absolutely occult] ... we are certainly disposed to view with 
satisfaction that speculation which supposes the photosphere to be the primary 
seat of vital power, and to regard with a poetic pleasure that hypothesis which 
refers the Solar energies to Life. 

Thus, we have an important scientific corroboration for one of our 
fundamental dogmas — namely, that (a) the Sun is the store-house of 
Vital Force, which is the Noumenon of Electricity; and (6) that it is 
from its mysterious, never-to-be-fathomed depths, that issue those life 
currents which thrill through Space, as through the organisms of every 
living thing on Earth. For see what another eminent physician says, 
who calls this (our life-fluid) " nervous Ether." Change a few sen- 
tences in the article, extracts from which now follow, and you have 
another quasi-Occult treatise on Life Force. This once, it is again Dr. 
B. W. Richardson, F. r. s., who gives his views"*' on " Nervous Ether," 
as he has on " Sun-Force " and " Earth-Force " : — 

The idea attempted to be conveyed by the theory is, that between the mole- 
cules of the matter, solid or fluid, of which the nervous organisms, and, indeed, 
of which all the organic parts of a body are composed, there exists a rr fined 
subtle medium, vaporous or gaseous, which holds the molecules in a amdiiUm 
for motion upon each other, and for arrangement and rearrangement of form; 
a medium by and though which all motion is conveyed; by and through which 
the one organ or part of the body is held in communion with the mhcr purtti 
by which and through whkh the outer living world communicates with thi* living 
man: a medium, which, being present, enables the phen/>mrna of lif« to Ix* dc 
monstrated, and which, being universally absent, leavet the l>ody mtUHWy dfud. . , , 

And the whole Solar System falls into Pralaya- i\\t author might 
have added. But let us read further: 

... I use the word Ether m its gtncral wmw; a« m^anifig a vt^ry liiflit, vapor 
ous or gaseous matter; I use it, in thort« at thr uhironomrr iJb<« ll wlicii he 
^>eaks of the Ether of Space, by which ht mmm a *tiUU hut wateiiA) maUmih 
. . . When I speak of a nervous Ether, I do nM '//iivry thut flic tiittr u ewinlmt 
in nervous structure only: I believe truly Omi il u « *im'Ii<I u^it at llic ncfvoia 
organization; but, as nerves pa^t irtU) uU ttruiiuM* tUul lidv<: «i<|mj iiiiii fof 
movement and sensibilities, so t>>< nervout n)^fr pttttm Utio itli atiiji (y#fU, t^ttd 

82Jtt. Pofulmr ScUntt tt0^i*w, yvf #, ^ i^l I- 



552 ^HE SECRET DOCTRINE 

as the nervous ether is, according to my view, a direct product from blood, so 
we may look upon it as part of the atmosphere of the blood. . . . The evidence 
in favor of the existence of an elastic medium pervading the nervous matter and 
capable of being influenced by simple pressure is all-convincing. ... In nervous 
structure there is, unquestionably, a true nervous fluid, as our predecessors 
taught."** The precise chemical [ ? ] *" composition of this fluid is not yet well 
known; the physical characters of it have been little studied. Whether it moves 
in currents, we do not know; whether it circulates, we do not know; whether 
it is formed in the centers and passes from them to the nerves, or whether it is 
formed everywhere where blood enters nerve, we do not know. The exact uses 
of the fluid we do not consequently know. It occurs to my mind, however, that 
the veritable fluid of nervous matter is not of itself sufiicient to act as the subtle 
medium that connects the outer with the inner universe of man and animaL I 
think — and this is the modification I suggest to the older theory — there must be 
another form of matter present during life; a matter which exists in the condi- 
tion of vapor or gas, which pervades the whole nervous organism, surrounds as 
an enveloping atmosphere^ each molecule of nervous structure, and is the med- 
ium of all motion, communicated to and from the nervous centers. . . . When 
it is once fairly presented to the mind that during life there is in the animal body 
a finely diffused form of matter, a vapor filling every part — and even stored in 
some parts; a matter constantly renewed by the vital chemistry; a matter as 
easily disposed of as the breath, after it has served its purpose — a new flood of 
light breaks on the Intelligence. . . . 

A new flood of light is certainly thrown on the wisdom of ancient 
and medieval Occultism and its votaries. For Paracelsus wrote the 
same thing more than three hundred years ago, namely, in the six- 
teenth century, as follows: — 

The whole of the Microcosm is potentially contained in the Liquor Vitae, a 
nerve fluid ... in which is contained the nature, quahty, character, and essence 
of beings. . . . (De Generatione Hominis). . . . The Archaeus or Liquor Viiae 
is an essence that is equally distributed in all parts of the human body. . . . The 
Spiritus Vitae takes its origin from the Spiritus Mundi. Being an emanati^m of 
the latter, it contains the elements of all cosmic influences, and is therefore the 
cause by which the action of the stars [cosmic forces] upon the invisible body 
of man [his vital lingalarira] may be explained. (De Viribus Membrorum} ■" 

Had Dr. Richardson studied all the secret works of Paracelsus, he 
would not have been obliged to confess so often — "we do not know** 
..." it is not known to us " . . . etc., etc. Nor would he have 
ever pronounced the following sentence, recanting the best portions of 
his independent rediscovery, in which he says:"* 

824. PftncelstiA for one, who called it man like a lominooa ipbefe ** . . 
liquor viia4, and Archaeus, Paracelsus in Paragrommm, 

825. Rather a/cli#mfca/ -" composition." „^ Stt Life of ParoceUue. b, 

nartmannt m. d., f. t. s. 

826. " This vital force . . . radiates arotmd 828. Pac* M4. 



PANTHEISM OR MONOTHEISM 533 

It may be urged that in this line of thought is included no more than the 
theory of the existence of the ether . . . supposed to pervade space. . . . 
It may be said that this universal ether pervades all the organism of the animal 
body as from without, and as part of every organization. This view would 
be Pantheism physically discovered if it were true [!!]. It fails to be true 
because it would destroy the individuality of every individual sense. . . . 

We fail to see it, and we know it is not so. Pantheism may 
be "physically rediscovered" It was known, seen, and felt by the 
whole of antiquity. Pantheism manifests itself in the vast expanse of 
the starry heavens, in the breathing of the seas and oceans and the 
quiver of life of the smallest blade of grass. Philosophy rejects one 
finite and imperfect God in the universe, as the anthropomorphic deity 
of the monotheist is represented by his followers. It repudiates in its 
name of Philo-Theo-Sophia the grotesque idea that Infinite, Absolute 
Deity should, or rather could, have any, whether direct or indirect, re- 
lation to finite illusive evolutions of matter, and therefore cannot im- 
agine a universe outside that Deity, or the latter absent from the small- 
est speck of animate or inanimate substance.®^* Why either the Ether 
of Space, or "nervous Ether" should "destroy the individuality of every 
sense" seems incomprehensible for one acquainted with the real nature 
of that "nervous ether" under its Sanskrit, or rather esoteric and 
Kabalistic name. Dr. Richardson agrees that — 

If we did not individually produce the medium of communication between 
ourselves and the outer world, if it were produced from without and adapted 
to one kind of vibration alone, there were fewer senses required than we possess : 
for, taking two illustrations only — ether of light is not adapted for sound, and 
yet we hear as well as see; while air, the medium of motion of sound, is not 
the medium of light, and yet we see and hear. 

This is not so. The opinion that " Pantheism fails to be true because 
it would destroy the individuality of every individual sense " shows that 
all the conclusions of the learned doctor are based on the modem phys- 
ical theories, though he would fain reform them. But he will find it 
impossible to do this unless he allows the existence of spiritual senses 
to replace the gradual atrophy of the physical. " We see and hear," 
in accordance (of course in Dr. Richardson's mind) with the explana- 
tions of the phenomena of sight and hearing, by that same materialistic 

829. This does not mean that every bush, the ever becoming; and also that every such 

tree or stone is God or a god; but only that speck individually, and Kosmos collectively, 

every q>eck of the manifested material of is an aspect and a reminder of that univer- 

Kosmos belongs to and is the substance of sal Ofi# Soul — which philosophy refuses to 

** God," however low it may have fallen in call God, thus limiting the eternal and ever^ 

Hs cyclic gyration through the Eternities of present root and essence. 



525 ^HE SSCItET DOCTRINE 

such that we have no word, except ether,*" by which to express it It per- 
vades and fills space, but alone it too is quiescent — dead."" We bring together 
the two elements, the inert matter, the self-repulsive Ether [?] and thereupon 
dead [?] ponderable matter is vivified; [PonderabU matter may be inert btii 
never dead — this is Occult Law, — H. P. B.] . . . through the particles of 
the ponderable substance the ether [Ether's second principle, — H. P. B.] pene- 
trates, and, so penetrating, it combines with the ponderable particles and holds 
them in mass, holds them together in bond of union; they are dissolved in the 
Ether, 

This distribution of solid ponderable matter through ether extends, accord- 
ing to the theory before us, to everything that exists at this moment. The 
ether is all-pervading. The human body itself is charged with the ether [Say 
astral light, — H. P. B.]; its minute particles are held together by it; the plant 
is in the same condition; the most solid earth, rock, adamant, crystal, metal, 
all are the same. But there are differences in the capacities of different kinds 
of ponderable matter to receive sun-force, and upon this depends the various 
changing conditions of matter; the solid, the liquid, the gaseous condttioiL 
Solid bodies have attracted caloric in excess over fluid bodies, and hence their 
firm cohesion; when a portion of molten zinc is poured upon a plate of solid 
zinc, the molten zinc becomes as solid because there is a rush of caloric from 
the liquid to the solid, and in the equalization the particles, previously loose or 
liquid, are more closely brought together. . . . Metcalfe himself, dwelling on 
the above-named phenomena, and accounting for them by the unity of princqik 
of action, which has already been explained, sums up his argument in very 
clear terms, in a conunent on the densities of various bodies. ''Hardness and 
softness" (he says), "solidity and liquidity, are not essential conditions of 
bodies, but depend on the relative proportions of ethereal and ponderable 
matter of which they are composed. The most elastic gas may be reduced 
to the liquid form by the abstraction of caloric, and again converted into a 
firm solid, the particles of which would cling together with a force propor- 
tional to their augmented affinity for caloric On the other hand, by adding a 
sufficient quantity of the same principle to the densest metals, their attractioo 
for it is diminished when they are expanded into the gaseous state, and their 
cohesion is destroyed." 

Having thus quoted at length the heterodox views of the great 
" heretic " — views that need only a little alteration of terras here and 
there, the same eminent scientist — an original and liberal thinker, un- 
deniably — proceeds to sum up those views, and continues : — 

807. Yet it it not Biker, trat only one a compound or eren a simple body that pro* 
of the prindplet of Ether, the latter being duces life. When a body dies it pssaes !■•» 



itself one of the principUs of Akdia, the same polarity as its male eoersy sttd 

808. And so does prAna (JHr*) perrade repels therefore the active agent, which, les- 

the whole living body of man; but alone, ing hold of the whoU, fastens on the parts 

without having an atom to act upon, it or molecules, this action being called 



would be quUseeni — dead; i. #., would be IcaL Vishnu, the Preserver, 

in laya, or as Mr. Crookes has it, '* locked himself into Rudra-Siva, the Destroyer — a 

in protylo," It is the action of Pohot upon correlation seemingly unknown to 



Vm DISAGREE 



527 



I shall not dwell at great length on this unity of sun-force and earth, 
which this theory implies. But I may add that out of it, or out of the hypo- 
thesis of mere motion as force, and of virtue without substance, we may gather, 
as the nearest possible approach to the truth on this, the most complex and 
profound of all subjects, the following inferences: — 

(a) Space, inter-stellary, inter-planetary, inter-material, inter-organlc, is not 
a vacuum, but is filled with a subtle fluid or gas, which for want of a better 
term"" we may still call, as the ancients did, Aith-ur — Solar fire, AfiTHER. 
This fluid, unchangeable in composition, indestructible, invisible,*^ pervades 
everything and all [ponderable. — H. P. B.] matter,*" the pebble in the run- 
ning brook, the tree overhanging, the man looking on, is charged with the ether 
in various degree; the pebble less than the tree, the tree less than man. All 
in the planet is in like manner so charged I A world is built up in ethereal 
fluid, and moving through a sea of it 

(b) The Ether, whatever its nature is, is from the sun and from the suns ; *** 
the suns are the generators of it, the store-houses of it, the diffusers of it*** 

(c) Without the ether there could be no motion; without it particles of 
ponderable matter could not glide over each other; without it there could be 
no impulse to excite those particles into action. 

(d) Ether determines the constitution of bodies. Were there no ether there 
could be no change of constitution in substance; water, for instance, could 
only exist as a substance, compact and insoluble beyond any conception we could 
form of it It could never even be ice, never flint, never vapor, except for ether. 

(r) Ether connects sun with planet, planet with planet, man with planet, man 
with man. Without ether there could be no communication in the Universe; 
no light, no heat, no phenomenon of motion. 

Thus we find that Ether and elastic atoms are, in the alleged mechan- 
ical conception of the Universe, the Spirit and Soul of Kosmos, and 
that the theory — put it any way and under whatever disguise — always 
leaves a more widely opened issue for men of Science to speculate 
beyond the line drawn by modem materialism — or call it agnosticism 



809. Verily, tmlest the occult tenns of 
the Kabftlists are adopted 1 

810. "Unchangeable" only during Man- 
vantaric periods, after iHiich it merges once 
more into Mnlaprakriti; "invisible" for ever, 
in its own essence, but seen in its reflected 
cortMcations, called the Astral light by the 
modem Kabalists. Yet, conscious and grand 
Beings clothed in that same Essence move 
in it. 

811. One has to add (ponderable), to dis- 
tinguish it from that Btktr which is matter 
•tin, though a substratum. 

812. The Occult Sciences reverse the 
statement, and say that it is the sun, and 
all the suns that are from it, which emanate 



at the Manvantark dawn from the Central 
Sun, 

813. Here, we decidedly beg to differ with 
the learned gentleman. Let us remember 
that this Aether, whether Ak&^ is meant by 
the term, or its lower ' principle. Ether — is 
septenary. AkAia is Aditi in the allegory, 
and the mother of Mirttinda (the sun), 
the Drvo-Af din — "Mother of the gods." 
In the solar system, the sun is her Buddhi 
and VAhan, the Vehicle, hence the 6th prin- 
ciple; in Kosmos all the suns are the Kima 
rfipa of AkUa and so is ours. It is only 
when regarded as an individual Entity in his 
own Kingdom that Sfirya (the sun) is the 
7th principle of the great body of ma$Ur, 



528 



THE SECRET DOCTRINE 



rather, to be more correct*** — than the majority avails itself of. 
Atoms, Ether, or both, modem speculation cannot get out of the circle 
of ancient thought; and the latter was soaked through with archaic 
occultism. Undulatory or corpuscular theory — it is all one. It is 
speculation from the aspects of phenomena, not from the knowledge 
of the essential nature of the C€mse and causes. When modem Science 
has explained to its audience the late achievements of Bunsen and 
KirchoflF, and shown the seven colors, the "primary" of a ray which 
is decomposed in a fixed order on a screen ; and described the respec- 
tive lengths of luminous waves, what has it proved? It has justified 
its reputation for exactness in mathematical achievement by measuring 
even the length of a luminous wave — " varying from about seven hun- 
dren and sixty millionths of a millimeter at the red end of the spectrum 
to about three hundred and ninety-three millionths of a millimeter at 
the violet end." But when the exactness of the calculation with r^ard 
to the effect on the light-wave is thus vindicated. Science is forced to 
admit that the force (which is the supposed cause) is believed to pro- 
duce " inconceivably minute undulations " in sotne medium — " genet' 
ally regarded as identical with the ethereal medium *^^^* — and that 
medium itself is still only — a " hypothetical agent " 1 

Auguste Comte's pessimism with respect to the impossibility of know- 
ing some day the chemical composition of the sun, has not been belied 
thirty years later by KirchoflF, as claimed. The spectroscope has helped 
us to see that the elements, with which the modem chemist is familiar, 
must in all probability be present in the sun's outward robes — not in 
the sun itself; and, taking these " robes," the solar cosmic veil, for 
the sun itself, the physicists have declared its luminosity to be due to 
combustion and flame, and have mistaken the vital principle of that 
luminary for a purely material thing, and called it " chromosphere," •*• 
We have h)rpotheses and theories only so far, not law — ^by any means. 



814. Brutal but frmnk materimlitm U more 
honest than Janua-faoed agnottidtm in our 
days. Monism i» the Pecksniff of modem 
philosophy, tnminc a Pharisaical face to 
psychology and idealism, and ks natural face 
of a Roman Augur, swelling his cheek with 
his tongue — to Materialism. The Monlsta 
are worse than the Materialists; because, 
while looking at the Universe and psycho- 
spiritual man from the same negative stand* 



point, the latter put their case fmr less 
plausibly than sceptics of Mr. TyridalTs or 
even Mr. Huxley's stamp. Herbert Speaerr. 
Bain and l>wes are more dangerous to uni- 
versal truths than Bfichner. 

815. Geology, by Professor A. WiachtlL 

816. See Pivo Years of Thsosophy -^ As^ 
ides: " Do the Adepts deny the acbolsr 
theory? " and " Is the Sun merely a cooBag 

t?" — for the true Occult frarbing. 



rp#" 



MYSTERIOUS SUN ^UID 529 

VIII 

LIFE, FORCE, OR GRAVITY 

The imponderable fluids have had their day; "mechanical Forces" 
are less talked about ; Science has put on a new face for this last quar- 
ter of a century ; but gravitation has remained, owing its life to new 
combinations after the old ones had nearly killed it. It may answer 
scientific hypotheses very well, but the question is whether it answers 
as well to truth, and represents a fact in nature. Attraction by itself is 
not sufiicient to explain merely planetary motion ; how can it presume 
to explain the rotatory motion in the inflnitudes of Space? Attraction 
alone will never fill all the gaps, unless a special impulse is admitted 
for every sidereal body, and the rotation of every planet with its satel- 
lites is shown to be due to some one cause combined with attraction. 
And even then, says an astronomer,'^^ Science would have to name 
that cause. 

Occultism has named it for ages, and so have all the ancient philo- 
sophers; but then all such beliefs are now proclaimed exploded su- 
perstitions. The "extra cosmic" God has killed every possibility of be- 
lief in intra cosmic intelligent Forces, yet who, or what is the original 
pusher in that motion ? " When we have learned the cause, unique et 
speciale, that pushes, we will be ready to combine it with the one which 
attracts," says Francceur.®" And again — "Attraction between the ce- 
lestial bodies is only repulsion: it is the Sun that drives them inces- 
santly onward; for otherwise, their motion would stop." 

If ever this theory of the Sun-Force being the primal cause of all 
life on earth and motion in heaven is accepted, and if that other far 
bolder one of Herschel — about certain organisms in the Sun — is ac- 
cepted even as a provisional hypothesis, then will our teachings be vin- 
dicated, and esoteric allegory shown to have anticipated Modem Sci- 
ence by millions of years, probably, for these are the Archaic teachings. 
Marttanda (the Sun) watches and threatens — without abandoning 
the central position to which his Mother, Aditi, relegated him — his 
seven brothers, the planets ; " he pursues them, turning slowly around 
himself . . . and follows them from afar, moving in the same direc- 
tion that they do, on the path that encircles their houses " — or the 
orbit*^* It is the Sun-fluids or Emanations that impart all motion and 
awaken all into life, in the Solar System. It is attraction and repulsion, 
but not as understood by modem physics and according to the law of 
gravity ; but in harmony with the laws of Manvantaric motion designed 

817. Pkiiosophie NaturetU, art 142. 818. AstronomU, p. 342. 

819. See Comment to Stanzm IV, Book L 



546 ^HE SECRET DOCTRINE 

liberal and progressive man of Science, however, the true and earnest 
scientific searcher after truth — e. g., the eminent chemist, Mr. Crookes, 
will corroborate the probability of the two statements. For, hardly has 
the echo of his lecture on the " Genesis of the Elements " died away 
— the lecture which, delivered by him before the Chemical Section of 
the British Association, at the last Birmingham meeting, so startled 
every evolutionist who heard or read it — than there came another one 
in March last, 1888. Once more the President of the Chemical Society 
brings before the world of Science and the public the fruits of some new 
discoveries in the realm of atoms, and tihese discoveries justify die 
occult teachings in every way. They are more startling even than the 
statements made by him in the first lecture (quoted later) and deserve 
well the attention of every Occultist, Theosophist, and Metaphysician. 
This is what he says in his "Elements and Afe/o-Elements," thus 
justifying Stallo's charges and prevision with the fearlessness of a sci- 
entific mind which loves truth for truth's sake, regardless of any con- 
sequences to his own glory and reputation. We quote his own words : 

Permit me, gentlemen, now to draw your attention for a short time to a subject 
which concerns the fundamental principles of chemistry, a subject which may 
lead us to admit the possible existence of bodies which, though neither cocn- 
potmds nor mixtures, are not elements in the strictest sense of the word — bodies 
which I venture to call " meta-elements." To explain my meaning it is neces- 
sary for me to revert to our conception of an element What is the criterion of 
an element? Where are we to draw the line between distinct existence and 
identity? No one doubts that oxygen, sodium, chlorine, sulphur are separate 
elements; and when we come to such groups as chlorine, bromine, iodine, &c^ 
we still feel no doubt, although were degrees of "dementidt/* admissible — and 
to that we may ultimately have to come — it might be allowed that chlorine ap- 
proximates much more closely to bromine than to oxygen, sodium, or so^ur. 
Again, nickel and cobalt are near to each other, very near, though no one ques- 
tions their claim to rank as distinct elements. Still I cannot help asking what 
would have been the prevalent opinion among chemists had the respective sofai- 
tions of these bodies and their compounds presented identical colors, instead of 
colors which, approximately speaking, are mutually complementary. Would 
their distinct nature have even now been recognized? When we pass further 
and come to the so-called rare earths the ground is less secure under oar feet. 
Perhaps we may admit scandium, ytterbium, and others of the like sort to de- 
mental rank; but what are we to say in the case of praseo- and neo-dynmuii, 
between which there may be said to exist no well-marked chemical difference, 
their chief daim to separate individuality being slight differences in basicity and 
crystallizing powers, though their physical distinctions, as shown by sp ec lim n 
observations, are very strongly marked ? Even here we may imagine the dispos- 
ition of the majority of chemists would indine toward the side of leniency, so 
that they would admit these two bodies within the charmed drde. Whether m 
so doing they would be able to appeal to any broad prindple is an open qoestioiL 



SUN-MRC^ AND EARTH-^RCS 531 

central Sun of our System be the source of all that life which crowds the earth, 
and fvithout doubt overspreads the other planets, to which the Sun is the mighty 
Minister f . . . 

Occultism answers these queries in the affirmative ; and Science will 
find this to be the case, one day. 
Again, on p. 156, Mr. Hunt writes: 

But regarding Life — Vital Force — as a power far more exalted than cither 
light, heat, or electricity, and indeed capable of exerting a controlling power over 
them all [this is absolutely occult] ... we are certainly disposed to view with 
satisfaction that speculation which supposes the photosphere to be the primary 
seat of vital power, and to regard with a poetic pleasure that hypothesis which 
refers the Solar energies to Life. 

Thus, we have an important scientific corroboration for one of our 
fundamental dogmas — namely, that (a) the Sun is the store-house of 
Vital Force, which is the Noumenon of Electricity; and (&) that it is 
from its mysterious, never-to-be-fathomed depths, that issue those life 
currents which thrill through Space, as through the organisms of every 
living thing on Earth. For see what another eminent physician says, 
who calls this (our life-fluid) "nervous Ether." Change a few sen- 
tences in the article, extracts from which now follow, and you have 
another quasi-Occult treatise on Life Force. This once, it is again Dr. 
B. W. Richardson, P. r. s., who gives his views*^*' on " Nervous Ether," 
as he has on " Sun-Force " and " Earth-Force " : — 

The idea attempted to be conveyed by the theory is, that between the mole- 
cules of the matter, solid or fluid, of which the nervous organisms, and, indeed, 
of which all the organic parts of a body are composed, there exists a refined 
subtle medium, vaporous or gaseous, which holds the molecules in a condition 
for motion upon each other, and for arrangement and rearrangement of form; 
a medium by and though which all motion is conveyed; by and through which 
the one organ or part of the body is held in communion with the other parts, 
by which and through which the outer living world communicates with the living 
man: a medium, which, being present, enables the phenomena of life to be de- 
monstrated, and which, being universally absent, leaves the body actually dead. . . . 

And the whole Solar System falls into PrcUaya — the author might 
have added. But let us read further: 

... I use the word Ether in its general sense as meaning a very light, vapor- 
ous or gaseous matter; I use it, in short, as the astronomer uses it when he 
speaks of the Ether of Space, by which he means a subtle but material medium. 
, . . When I speak of a nervous Ether, I do not convey that the ether is existent 
in nervous structure only : I believe truly that it is a special part of the nervous 
organization; but, as nerves pass into all structures that have capacities for 
movement and sensibilities, so the nervous ether passes into all such parts; and 

823a. Popular Scitnct RtvUw, toI. x, p. 380-3. 



552 ^HE SECRET DOCTRINE 

as the nervous ether is, according to my view, a direct product from blood, to 
we may look upon it as part of the atmosphere of the blood. . . . The evidence 
in favor of the existence of an elastic medium pervading the nervous matter and 
capable of being influenced by simple pressure is all-convincing. ... In nervous 
structure there is, unquestionably, a true nervous fluid, ai our predeceuors 
taught."** The precise chemical [ ? ] *" composition of this fluid is not yet well 
known ; the physical characters of it have been little studied. Whether it moves 
in currents, we do not know; whether it circulates, we do not know; whether 
it is formed in the centers and passes from them to the nerves, or whether it is 
formed everywhere where blood enters nerve, we do not know. The exact uses 
of the fluid we do not consequently know. It occurs to my mind, however, that 
the veritable fluid of nervous matter is not of itself sufiicient to act as the subtk 
medium that connects the outer with the inner universe of man and animal I 
think — and this is the modification I suggest to the older theory — there must be 
another form of matter present during life; a matter which exists in the condi- 
tion of vapor or gas, which pervades the whole nervous organism, surroumds as 
an enveloping atmosphere^ each molecule of nervous structure, and is the med- 
ium of all motion, communicated to and from the nervous centers. . . . When 
it is once fairly presented to the mind that during life there is in th4 animai body 
a finely diffused form of matter, a vapor filling every part — and even stored in 
some parts; a matter constantly renewed by the vital chemistry; a matter as 
easily disposed of as the breath, after it has served its purpose — a new flood of 
light breaks on the Intelligence. . . . 

A new flood of light is certainly thrown on the wisdom of ancient 
and medieval Occultism and its votaries. For Paracelsus wrote the 
same thing more than three hundred years ago, namely, in the six- 
teenth century, as follows: — 

The whole of the Microcosm is potentially contained in the Liquor Vitoe, a 
nerve fluid ... in which is contained the nature, quality, character, and essence 
of beings. . . . (De Generatione Hominis). . . . The Archaeus or Liquor Vitat 
is an essence that is equally distributed in all parts of the human body. . . . The 
Spiritus Vitae takes its origin from the Spiritus Mundi. Being an emanation of 
the latter, it contains the elements of all cosmic influences, and is therefore the 
cause by which the action of the stars [cosmic forces] upon the invisible body 
of man [his xntal linga^arira] may be explained. (De Viribus Membrorum) "* 

Had Dr. Richardson studied all the secret works of Paracelsus, he 
would not have been obliged to confess so often — "we do not know" 
..." it is not known to us " . . . etc., etc. Nor would he have 
ever pronounced the following sentence, recanting the best portions of 
his independent rediscovery, in which he says:"* 

824. Paracelsus for one, who called it man like a Inminons ^Aere" . . . ««y« 
liqupr vita4, and Archaeus. Paracelsus in Pangramum, 

826. " This vital for«e . . . radiates around 828. Paft M4. 



PANTHEISM OR MONOTHEISM 533 

It may be urged that in this line of thought is included no more than the 
theory of the existence of the ether . . . supposed to pervade space. . . . 
It may be said that this universal ether pervades all the organism of the animal 
body as from without, and as part of every organization. This view would 
be Pantheism physically discovered if it were true [11]. It fails to be true 
because it would destroy the individuality of every individual sense. . . . 

We fail to see it, and we know it is not so. Pantheism may 
be " physically rediscovered.** It was known, seen, and felt by the 
whole of antiquity. Pantheism manifests itself in the vast expanse of 
the starry heavens, in the breathing of the seas and oceans and the 
quiver of life of the smallest blade of grass. Philosophy rejects one 
finite and imperfect God in the universe, as the anthropomorphic deity 
of the monotheist is represented by his followers. It repudiates in its 
name of PhilO'Theo-Sophia the grotesque idea that Infinite, Absolute 
Deity should, or rather could, have any, whether direct or indirect, re- 
lation to finite illusive evolutions of matter, and therefore cannot im- 
agine a universe outside that Deity, or the latter absent from the small- 
est speck of animate or inanimate substance.®** Why either the Ether 
of Space, or "nervous Ether" should "destroy the individuality of every 
sense" seems incomprehensible for one acquainted with the real nature 
of that "nervous ether" under its Sanskrit, or rather esoteric and 
Kabalistic name. Dr. Richardson agrees that — 

If we did not individually produce the medium of communication between 
ourselves and the outer world, if it were produced from without and adapted 
to one kind of tnbration alone, there were fewer senses required than we possess : 
for, taking two illustrations only — ether of light is not adapted for sound, and 
yet we hear as well as see; while air, the medium of motion of sound, is not 
the medium of light, and yet we see and hear. 

This is not so. The opinion that " Pantheism fails to be true because 
it would destroy the individuality of every individual sense " shows that 
all the conclusions of the learned doctor are based on the modem phys- 
ical theories, though he would fain reform them. But he will find it 
impossible to do this unless he allows the existence of spiritual senses 
to replace the gradual atrophy of the physical. " We see and hear," 
in accordance (of course in Dr. Richardson's mind) with the explana- 
tions of the phenomena of sight and hearing, by that same materialistic 

829. This does not mean that every buth, the ever becoming; and also that every such 

tree or stone is God or a god; but only that speck individually^ and Kosmos collectively, 

every speck of the manifested material of is an aspect and a reminder of that univer- 

Kosmos belongs to and is the substance of sal One Soul — which philosophy refuses to 

" God," however low it may have fallen in call God, thus limiting the eternal and ever^ 

its ctcUc gyration through the Eternities of present root and essence. 




550 ^HE SECRET DOCTRINE 

two tails join on earth (the manifested Universe) into one, and this is 
the great illusion, O Lanool 

Every one knows what the caduccus is, 
already modified by the Greeks. The ori- 
ginal symbol — with the triple head of the 
serpent — became altered into a rod with a 
knob, and the two lower heads were sep- 
arated, thus disfiguring somewhat the ori- 
ginal meaning. Yet it is as good an illus- 
tration as can be for our purpose, this laya 
rod entwined by two serpents. Verily die 
wonderful powers of the magic caduceus 
were sung by all the ancient poets, with a 
very good reason for those who understood 
the secret meaning. 

Now what says the learned President 
of the Chemical Society of Great Britain, 
in that same lecture, which has any refer- 
ence to, or bearing upon, our above-men- 
tioned doctrine. Very little; only this — 
and nothing more: — 

In the Birmingham address already referred to I asked my audience to pic- 
ture the action of two forces on the original protyle — one being time, accom- 
panied by a lowering of temperature; the other swinging to and fro Uke a 
mighty pendulum, having periodic cycles of ebb and swell, rest and activity* 
being intimately connected with the imponderable matter, essence, or source of 
energy we call electricity. Now, a simile like this effects its object if it fixes 
in the mind the particular fact it is intended to emphasize, but it must not 
be expected necessarily to run parallel with all the facts. Besides the lowering 
of temperature with the periodic ebb and flow of electricity, positive o^ nega- 
tive, requisite to confer on the newly-born elements their particular atomicity, 
it is evident that a third factor must be taken into account Nature does not 
act on a flat plane; she demands space for her cosmogenic operations, and if 
we introduce space as the third factor, all appears clear. Instead of a pendolaniv 
which, though to a certain extent a good illustration, is impossible as a fact, 
let us seek some more satisfactory way of representing what I conceire may have 
taken place. Let us suppose the zigzag diagram not drawn upon a plane, but 
projected in space of three dimensions. What figure can we best select to meet 
all the conditions involved? Many of the facts can be well explained by sup- 
posing the projection in space of Professor Emerson Reynolds' zigzag curve to 
be a spiral. This figure is, however, inadmissible, inasmuch as the curve has to 
pass through a point neutral as to electricity and chemical energy twice in each 
cycle. We must, therefore, adopt some other figure. A figure of eight (8), or 
lemniscate, will foreshorten into a zigzag just as well as a spiral, and it fulfils 
every condition of the problem. 



THE CADUCEUS OP tVft 551 

A lemniscate for the evolution downward, from Spirit into matter; 
another form of a spiral, perhaps, in its reinvolutionary path onward, 
from matter into Spirit, and the necessary gradual and final reabsorp- 
tion into the laya state, that which Science calls in her own way " the 
point neutral as to electricity " etc., or the eero point. Such are the 
Occult facts and statement. They may be left with the greatest 
security and confidence to Science, to be justified some day. Let us 
bear some more, however, about this primordial genetic type of the 
symbolical caduceus. 

Such a figure will result from three very simple simultaneous motions. First, 
a simple oscillation backwards and forwards (suppose east and west) ; second- 
ly, a simple oscillation at right angles to the former (suppose north and south) 
of half the periodic time — i,e,, twice as fast; and thirdly, a motion at right 
angles to these two (suppose downwards), which, in its simplest form, would be 
with unvarying velocity. If we project this figure in space we find on examination 
that the points of the curves, where chlorine, bromine, and iodine are formed, 
come close under each other; so also will sulphur, selenium, and tellurium; 
again, phosphorus, arsenic, and antimony; and in like manner other series of 
analogous bodies. It may be asked whether this scheme explains how and why 
the elements appear in this order ? Let us imagine a cyclical translation in space, 
each evolution witnessing the genesis of the group of elements which I pre- 
viously represented as produced during one complete vibration of the pendulunL 
Let us suppose that one cycle has thus been completed, the center of the un- 
known creative force in its mighty journey through space having scattered along 
its track the primitive atoms — the seeds, if I may use the expression — which 
presendy are to coalesce and develop into the groupings now known as lithium, 
beiyllium, boron, carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, fluorine, sodium, magnesium, alum- 
inium, silicon, phosphorus, sulphur, and chlorine. What is most probably the form 
of track now pursued? Were it strictiy confined to the same plane of tempera- 
ture and time, the next elementary groupings to appear would again have been 
those of lithium, and the original cycle would have been eternally repeated, pro- 
ducing again and again the same 14 elements. The conditions, however, are not 
quite the same. Space and electricity are as at first, but temperature has altered, 
and thus, instead of the atoms of lithium being supplemented with atoms in all 
respects analogous with themselves, the atomic groupings which come into being 
when the second cycle commences form, not lithium, but its lineal descendant, 
potassium. Suppose, therefore, the vis generatrix traveling to and fro in cycles 
along a lemniscate path, as above suggested, while simultaneously temperature 
b declining and time is flowing on — variations which I have endeavored to re- 
present by the downward sink — each coil of the lemniscate track crosses the 
same vertical line at lower and lower points. Projected in space, the curve 
shows a central line neutral as far as electricity is concerned, and neutral in 
chemical properties — positive electricity on the north, negative on the south. 
Dominant atomicities are governed by the distance east and west from the neu- 
tral center line, monatomic elements being one remove from it, diatomic two 
removes, and so on. In every successive coil the same law holds good. 



552 TH0 SECItET DOCTRINE 

And, as if to prove the postulate of Occult Science and Hindu philo- 
sophy, that, at the hour of the Pralaya, the two expects of the un- 
knowable deity, "the Swan in darkness" — Prakriti and Purusha, 
nature or matter in all its forms and Spirit — " no longer subsist but 
are {absolutely) dissolved," we learn the conclusive scientific opinion 
of the great English chemist, who caps his proofs by saying: — 

We have now traced the formation of the chemical elements from knots and 
voids in a primitive, formless fluid. We have shown the possibility, nay, the 
probability that the atoms are not eternal in existence, but share with all other 
created beings the attributes of decay and death. 

• 

Occultism says amen to this, as the Scientific "possibility** and 
" probability " are for it facts demonstrated beyond the necessity of 
further proof or any extraneous physical evidence. Nevertheless, it 
repeats with as much assurance as ever : " matter is eternal, be- 
coming atomic (its aspect) only periodically." This is as sure as 
that the other proposition, which is almost unanimously accepted by 
astronomers and physicists — namely, that the wear and tear of the 
body of the Universe is steadily going on, and that it will finally lead 
to the extinction of the Solar fires and the destruction of the Universe 
— is quite erroneous on the lines traced by Men of Science. There will 
be, as there ever were in time and eternity, periodical dissolutions of 
the manifested Universe, but (a) a partial prcdoya after every " Day 
of Brahma"; and (&) a Universal pralaya — the Maha-prai-aya — 
only after the lapse of every Brahma's age. But the scientific causes 
for such dissolution, as brought forward by exact Science, have no- 
thing to do with the true causes. However that may be. Occultism 
is once more justified by Science, for Mr. Crookes said: — 

We have shown, from arguments drawn from the chemical laboratory, that 
in matter which has responded to every test of an element, there are minute 
shades of difference which may admit of selection. We have seen that the time- 
honored distinction between elements and compounds no longer keeps pace with 
the developments of chemical science, but must be modified to include a vast 
array of intermediate bodies — " meta-elements." We have shown how the ob- 
jections of Clerk-Maxwell, weighty as they are, may be met; and finally, wc 
have adduced reasons for believing that primitive matter was formed by the 
action of a generative force, throwing off at intervals of time atoms endowed 
with varying quantities of primitive forms of energy. If we may hazard any 
conjectures as to the source of energy embodied in a chemical atom, we may, 
I think, premise that the heat radiations propagated outwards through the ether 
from the ponderable matter of the universe, by some process of nature not ytx 
known to us, are transformed at the confines of the universe into die primary — 
the essentia] — motions of chemical atoms, which, the instant they are formed, 
gravitate inwards, and thus restore to the universe the energy which otherwise 
would be lost to it through radiant heat If this conjecture be well foonded. 



TRUE SIGNS OP THE TIMES 553 

Sir William Thomson's startling prediction of the final decrepitude of the uni- 
verse through the dissipation of its energy falls to the ground. In this fashion, 
gentlemen, it seems to me that the question of the elements may be provision- 
ally treated. Our slender knowledge of these first mysteries is extending stead- 
ily, surely, though slowly. 

By a strong and curious coincidence even our " septenary " doctrine 
seems to force the hand of Science. If we understand rightly. 
Chemistry speaks of fourteen groupings of primitive atoms — lithium, 
beryllium, boron, carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, fluorine, sodium, magne- 
sium, aluminium, silicon, phosphorus, sulphur and chlorine; and Mr. 
Crookes, speaking of the " dominant atomicities," enumerates seven 
groups of tfiese, for he says : — 

As the mighty focus of creative energy goes round, we see it in successive 
cycles sowing in one tract of space seeds of lithium, potassium, rubidium, and 
caesium; in another tract, chlorine, bromine, and iodine; in a third, sodium, 
copper, silver, and gold; in a fourth, sulphur, selenium, and tellurium; in a 
fifth, beryllium, calcium, strontium, and barium; in a sixth, magnesium, zinc, 
cadmium, and mercury; in a seventh, phosphorus, arsenic, antimony, and bis- 
muth [which makes seven groupings on the one hand. And after showing] 
. . . in other tracts the other elements — namely, aluminium, gallium, indium, 
and thallium; silicon, germanium, and tin; carbon, titanium, and zirconium, 

he adds : " While a natural position near the neutral axis is found 
for the three groups of elements relegated by Professor MendeleeflF to 
a sort of Hospital for Incurables — his eighth family." It might be in- 
teresting to compare these " seven of the eighth family of 'incurables' " 
with the allegories concerning the seven primitive sons of " Mother, 
Infinite Space," or Aditi, and the eighth son rejected by her. Many a 
strange coincidence may thus be found between "those intermediate 
links . . ." named meta-elements or elementoids and those whom occult 
science names their noumenoi, the intelligent minds and rulers of those 
groupings of Monads and Atoms. But this would lead us too far. Let 
us be content with finding the confession of the fact that 

this deviation from absolute homogeneity should mark the constitution of these 
molecules or aggregations of matter which we designate elements and will per- 
haps be clearer if we return in imagination to the earliest dawn of our material 
universe, and, face to face with the Great Secret, try to consider the processes 
of elemental evolution. 

Thus finally Science, in the person of its highest representatives, in 
order to make itself clearer to the profane, adopts the phraseology of 
such old adepts as Roger Bacon, and returns to the "protyle." All 
this is hopeful and suggestive of the " signs of the times." 

Indeed these "signs" are many and multiply daily; but none are 
more important than those just quoted. For now the chasm between 



554 ^HE SECRET DOCTRINE 

the occult "superstitious and unscientific" teachings and "exact'' 
science is completely bridged, and one, at least, of the few eminent 
chemists of the day is in the realm of the infinite possibilities of 
occultism. Every new step he will take will bring him nearer and 
nearer to that mysterious center, from which radiate the innumerable 
paths that lead down Spirit into matter, and which transform the gods 
and the living monads into man and sentient nature. 

But we have something more to say on this subject in the following 
section. 



X 

THE COMING FORCE 

ITS POSSIBILITIES AND IMPOSSIBILITIES 

Shall we say that Force is " moving matter," or " matter in motion,*' 
and a manifestation of energy; or that matter and force are the phe- 
nomenal diflferentiated aspects of the one primary, undifferentiated 
Cosmic Substance? 

This query is made with regard to that Stanza which treats of Fohat 
and his " Seven brothers or Sons," in other words, of the cause and 
the effects of Cosmic Electricity, the latter called, in Occult parlance, 
the seven primary forces of Electricity, whose purely phenomenal, 
and hence grossest effects are alone cognizable by physicists on the 
cosmic and especially on the terrestrial plane. These include, among 
other things, Sound, Light, Color, etc., etc. Now what does ph3rsical 
Science tell us of these "Forces"? Sound, it says, is a sensation 
produced by the impact of atmospheric molecules on the tympanum, 
which, by setting up delicate tremors in the auditory apparatus, thus 
communicate themselves to the brain. Light is the sensation caused 
by the impact of inconceivably minute vibrations of ether on the reti$ta 
of the eye. 

So, too, we say. But this is simply the effect produced in our atmo- 
sphere and its immediate surroundings, all, in fact, which falls within 
the range of our terrestrial consciousness. Jupiter Pluvius sent his 
symbol in drops of rain, of water composed, as it is believed, of two 
" elements," which chemistry dissociates and recombines. The com- 
pound molecules are in its power, but their atoms still elude its grasp. 
Occultism sees in all these Forces and manifestations a ladder, the 
lower rungs of which belong to exoteric physics, and the higher are 
traced to a living, intelligent, invisible Power, which is, as a rule, the 
unconcerned, and exceptionally, the conscious cause of the sense4)oni 
phenomenon designated as this or another natural law. 



DIVINE, INPCRNAI<, OR TERRESTRIAI^ l^ORCE? 



555 



Wc say and maintain that Sound, for one thing, is a tremendous 
Occult power; that it is a stupendous force, of which the electricity 
generated by a million of Niagaras could never counteract the small- 
est potentiality when directed with occult knowledge. Sound may 
be produced of such a nature that the pyramid of Cheops would be 
raised in the air, or that a d3ring man, nay, one at his last breath, 
would be revived and filled with new energy and vigor. 

For Sound generates, or rather attracts together, the elements that 
produce an ozone, the fabrication of which is beyond chemistry, but 
within the limits of Alchemy. It may even resurrect 2l man or an 
animal whose astral "vital body" has not been irreparably separated 
from the physical body by the severance of the magnetic or odic chord. 
As one saved thrice from death by that power, the writer ought to be 
credited with knowing personally something about it. 

And if all this appears too unscientific to be even noticed, let Science 
explain to what mechanical and physical laws known to it, are due the 
recently produced phenomena of the so-called " Keely motor " ? What 
is it that acts as the formidable generator of invisible but tremendous 
force, of that power which is not only capable of driving an engine of 
25 horse-power, but has even been employed to lift the machinery bod- 
ily? Yet this is done by simply drawing a fiddle-bow across a tuning 
fork, as has been repeatedly proven. For the etheric Force, discovered 
by the well-known (in America and now in Europe) John Worrell 
Keely, of Philadelphia, is no hallucination. Notwithstanding his fail- 
ure to utilize it, a failure prognosticated and maintained by some 
Occultists from the first, the phenomena exhibited by the discoverer 
during the last few years have been wonderful, almost miraculous, not 
in the sense of the supernatural ^^^ but of the superhuman. Had Keely 
been permitted to succeed, he might have reduced a whole army to 
atoms in the space of a few seconds as easily as he reduced a dead ox 
to the same condition. 

The reader is now asked to give a serious attention to that newly- 
discovered potency which the discoverer has named " Inter-Etheric 
Force and Forces." 



856. The ivord " ttipematural " implies 
cbov€ or outside of nature. Nature and 
Space are one. Now Space for the meta- 
phjrsician exists oik»side of any act of sensa- 
tion, and is a purely subjective representa- 
tion; materialism, which would connect it 
forcibly with one or the other datum of sen- 
sation, notwithstanding. For our senses, ii 
is fairly suhjsetivo when independent of any* 
thing within it. How then can any pheno« 

non, or anything else, sUp outsido of or 



hs Performsd bsyond thai which has no Urn- 
its f But when spadal extension becomes 
simply conceptual, and is thought of in an 
idea connected with certain actions, as by 
the materialists and the phjrsicists, then again 
they have hardly a right to define and claim 
that which can or can not be produced by 
Forces generated within even limited spaces, 
as they have not even an approximate idea 
of what those forces are. 



556 'i^HH SECRET DOCTRINE 

In the humble opinion of the Occultists, as of his immediate friends, 
Mr. Keely, of Philadelphia, was, and still is, at the threshold of some 
of the greatest secrets of the Universe; of that chiefly on which is 
built the whole mystery of physical Forces, and the esoteric significance 
of the "Mundane Egg" sjrmbolism. Occult philosophy, viewing the 
manifested and the unmanifested Kosmos as a unity, symbolizes the 
ideal conception of the former by that '* Golden Egg " with two poles 
in it. It is the positive pole that acts in the manifested world of matter, 
while the negative is lost in the unknowable absoluteness of sat — 
" Be-ness" "*^ Whether this agrees with the philosophy of Mr. Keely, 
we cannot tell, nor does it really much matter. Nevertheless, his ideas 
about the ethero-material construction of the Universe look strangely 
like our own, being in this respect nearly identical. This is what we 
find him saying in an able pamphlet compiled by Mrs. Bloomfield- 
Moore, an American lady of wealth and position, whose incessant 
efforts in the pursuit of truth can never be too highly appreciated: — 

Mr. Keely, in explanation of the working of his engine, says : " In the concep- 
tion of any machine heretofore constructed, the medium for inducing a neutral 
center has never been found. If it had, the difficulties of perpetual-motion 
seekers would have ended, and this problem would have become an established 
and operating fact. It would only require an introductory impulse of a few 
pounds, on such a device, to cause it to run for centuries. In the conception 
of my vibratory engine, I did not seek to attain perpetual motion; but a cir- 
cuit is formed that actually has a neutral center, which is in a condition to be 
vivified by my vibratory ether, and, while under operation by said substance, 
is really a machine that is virtually independent of the mass (or globe),"" and 
it is the wonderful velocity of the vibratory circuit which makes it so. Still, 
with all its perfection, it requires to be fed with the vibratory ether to make 
it an independent motor. . . . 

All structures require a foundation in strength according to the weight of 
the mass they have to carry, but the foundations of the universe rest on a 
vacuous point far more minute than a molecule; in fact, to express this truth 
properly, on an inier-etheric point, which requires an infinite mind to understand 
it. To look down into the depths of an etheric center is precisely the same as 
it would be to search into the broad expanse of heaven's ether to find the end, 
with this difference: that one is the positive field, while the other is the 
negative field.*. . . 

This, as easily seen, is precisely the Eastern doctrine. His inter- 
etheric point is the laychpoint of the Occultists, which, however, does 

857 It is not correct, when speaking of At any rate, it is incorrect to aay ao of 

idealism, to show it baaed upon "the old onto- idealism in Eastern philosophy and its oog^ 

logical assumptions that things or entities ex- nition, for it is just the reverse, 

ist independently of each other, and other- 858. Independent, in a certain sense, Init 

wise than as terms of relations" (Stallo). not disconnected with it 



AN UNCONSCIOUS OCCUWIST S57 

not require "an infinite mind to understand it," but only a specific 
intuition and ability to trace its hiding-place in this world of matter. 
Of course, the laya center cannot be produced, but an inter-etheric 
vacuum can — as proved in the production of bell-sounds in space. 
Mr. Keely speaks as an unconscious Occultist, nevertheless, when he 
remarks in his theory of planetary suspension: — 

As regards planetary volume, we would ask in a scientific point of view. 
How can the immense difference of volume in the planets exist without dis- 
organising the harmonious action that has always characterised them? I can 
only answer this question properly by entering into a progressive anal}rsis, 
starting on the rotating etheric centers that were fixed by the Creator^ with 
their attractive or accumulative power. If you ask what power it is that gives 
to each etheric atom its inconceivable velocity of rotation (or introductory 
impulse), I must answer that no finite mind will ever be able to conceive what 
it is. The philosophy of accumulation is the only proof that such a power has 
been given. The area, if we can so speak, of such an atom, presents to the 
attractive or magnetic, the elective or propulsive, all the receptive force and all 
the antagonistic force that characterises a planet of the largest magnitude; 
consequently, as the accumulation goes on, the perfect equation remains the 
same. When this minute center has once been fixed, the power to rend it from 
Its position would necessarily have to be so great as to displace the most 
immense planet that exists. When this atomic neutral center is displaced, the 
planet must go with it The neutral center carries the full load of any accumu- 
lation from the start, and remains the same, for ever balanced in the eternal 
space. 

Mr. Keely illustrates his idea of " a neutral center " in this way : — 

We will imagine that, after an accumulation of a planet of any diameter, 
say, 20,000 miles more or less, for the size has nothing to do with the problem, 
there should be a displacement of all the material, with the exception of a 
crust 5000 miles thick, leaving an intervening void between this crust and a 
center of the size of an ordinary billiard ball, it would then require a force as 
great to move this small central mass as it would to move the shell of 5000 
miles thickness. Moreover, this small central mass would carry the load of 
this crust for ever, keeping it equidistant; and there could be no opposing 
power, however great, that could bring them together. The imagination stag- 
gers in contemplating the immense load which bears upon this point of center, 
where weight ceases. . . . This is what we understand by a neutral center. 

And what the Occultists understand by a " laya center." 

The above is pronounced "unscientific" by many. But so is every- 
thing that is not sanctioned and kept on strictly orthodox lines by 
physical science. Unless the explanation given by the inventor himself 

8S9. "By Pohai, more likely/' would be in Occultitt't reply. 



558 



THIS SOCKET DOCTRINE 



is accepted — and his explanations, being, as observed, quite orthodox 
from the spiritual and the Occult standpoints, if not from that of mater- 
ialistic speculative (called exact) Science, are therefore ours in this 
particular — what can science answer to facts already seen which it 
is no longer possible for anyone to deny? Occult philosophy divulges 
few of its most important vital mysteries. It drops them like precious 
pearls one by one, far and wide apart, and only when forced to do 
so by the evolutionary tidal wave that carries on humanity slowly, 
silently, but steadily toward the dawn of the Sixth-Race mankind 
For once out of the safe custody of their legitimate heirs and keepers, 
those mysteries cease to be occult: they fall into the public domain 
and have to run the risk of becoming in the hands of the selfish — 
of the Cains of the human race — curses more often than blessings. 
Nevertheless, whenever such individuals as the discoverer of Btheric 
Force — John Worrell Keely — men with peculiar psychic and mental 
capacities*** are bom, they are generally and more frequently helped 
than allowed to go unassisted; groping on their way, though, if left 
to their own resources, falling very soon victims to martyrdom and 
unscrupulous speculators. Only they are helped on the condition that 
they should not become, whether consciously or unconsciously, an 
additional peril to their age: a danger to the poor, now offered in 
daily holocaust by the less wealthy to the very wealthy.**^ This 
necessitates a short digression and an explanation. 

Some twelve years back, during the Philadelphia Centennial Exhibi- 
tion, the writer, in answering the earnest queries of a theosophist, one 
of the earliest admirers of Mr. Keely, repeated to him what she had 
heard in quarters, information from which she could never doubt 

It had been stated that the inventor of the " Self-Motor " was what 
is called, in the jargon of the Kabalists, a "natural-born magician." 
That he was and would remain unconscious of the full range of his 
powers, and would work out merely those which he had found out 
and ascertained in his own nature — firstly, because, attributing them 
to a wrong source, he could never give them full sway; and secondly 
because it was beyond his power to pass to others that which was a 



860. The reuon for tuch psjrchic capaci- 
ties is given farther on. 

861. The above was written two years 
ago, at a time when hopes of saccess for the 
" Keely Motor " were at their highest What 
was then said by the writer proved true, in 
every word, and now only a few remarks are 
added to it with regard to the failure of 
his expectations, so far, which has now been 
admitted by the discoverer himself. Though, 
however, the word failure is here used, the 



reader should understand it in a relative 
sense, for as Mrs. Bloomfield-Moore escplains: 
"What Mr. Keely does admit is that, 
baffled in applying vibratory force to mechan- 
ics, upon his first and second lines of experi- 
mental research, he was obliged either to 
confess a commercial failure, or to try a 
third departure from his base or principle; 
seeking success through another channeL" 
. . . And this " channel " is on the physical 
plane. 



THH nRST-BORN OP ETHER 559 

capacity inherent in his special nature. Hence the whole secret could 
not be made over permanently to anyone for practical purposes or use/** 

Individuals bom with such a capacity are not very rare. That they 
are not heard of more frequently is due to the fact that they live and 
die, in almost every case, in utter ignorance of being possessed of 
abnormal powers at all. Mr. Keely possesses powers which are called 
" abnormal " just because they happen in our day to be as little known 
as blood circulation was before Harvey's time. Blood existed, and it 
behaved as it does at present in the first man bom from woman ; and 
so does that principle in man which can control and guide etheric 
vibratory force. At any rate it exists in all those mortals whose inner 
selves are primordially connected, by reason of their direct descent, 
with that group of Dhyan Chohans who are called "the first-born 
of Bther." Mankind, psychically considered, is divided into various 
groups, each of which is connected with one of the Dhyanic groups 
that first formed psychic man."*** Mr. Keely being greatly favored in 
this respect, and moreover, besides his psychic temperament, being 
intellectually a genius in mechanics, may thus achieve most wonderful 
results. He has achieved some already — more than any mortal man, 
not initiated into the final mysteries, has achieved in this age up to 
the present day. What he has done is certainly quite sufficient "to 
demolish with the hammer of Science the idols of Science" — the 
idols of matter with the feet of clay — as his friends justly predict 
and say of him. Nor would the writer for a moment think of contra- 
dicting Mrs. Bloomfield-Moore, when in her paper on " Psychic Force 
and Etheric Force," she states that Mr. Keely, as a philosopher, " is 
great enough in soul, wise enough in mind, and sublime enough in 
courage to overcome all difficulties, and to stand at last before the 
world as the greatest discoverer and inventor in the world." 

And again she writes: — 

Should Keely do no more than lead scientists from the dreary realms where 
they arc groping into the open field of elemental force, where gravity and 
cohesion are disturbed in their haunts and diverted to use; where, from unity 
of origin, emanates infinite energy in diversified forms, he will achieve immortal 
fame. Should he demonstrate, to the destruction of materialism, that the uni- 
verse is animated by a mysterious principle to which matter, however perfectly 
organized, is absolutely subservient, he will be a greater spiritual benefactor to 
our race than the modem world has yet found in any man. Should he be able 
to -eubstitute, in the treatment of disease, the finer forces of nature for the 
grossly material agencies which have sent more human beings to their graves 

862. We learn that theae remarka are not applicable to Mr. Kee^a lateat diacovery; 
time alone can ahow the exact limita of hia achievementa. 

€62a. See paragrapha 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 in the Commentary to Stansa VII. 



560 THH SECRN DOCTRINE 

than war, pestilence and famine combined, he will merit and receive the grati- 
tude of mankind. All this and more will he do, if he and those who have 
watched his progress, day by day for years, are not too sanguine in their ex- 
pectations. 

Writing in the T. P. S. (" Theosophical Publication Society ") series 
(No. 9), the same lady, in her pamphlet, " Keely's Secrets," brings for- 
ward a passage from an article, written a few years ago by the writer 
of the present volume, in her journal, the Theosophist, in these words : 

The author of No. 5 of the pamphlets issued by the Theosophical Publica- 
tion Society, " What is Matter and What is Force," says therein, " The men of 
science have just found out 'a fourth state of matter,' whereas the Occultists 
have penetrated years ago beyond the sixth, and therefore do not infer, but 
know of, the existence of the seventh, the last" This knowledge comprises one 
of the secrets of Keely's so-called ''compound secret" It is already known to 
many that his secret includes "the augmentation of energy," the iniulatioo of 
the ether, and the adaptation of dynaspheric force to machinery. 

It is just because Keely's discovery would lead to a knowledge of one 
of the most occult secrets, a secret which can never be allowed to fall 
into the hands of the masses, that his failure to push his discoveries to 
their logical end seems certain to Occultists. But of this more pre- 
sently. Even in its limitations this discovery may prove of the greatest 
benefit. For : — 

Step by step, with a patient perseverance which some day Uie world will 
honor, this man of genius has made his researches, overcoming the cok>ssal 
difficulties which again and again raised up in his path what seemed to be (to 
all but himself) insurmountable barriers to further progress: but never has the 
world's index finger so pointed to an hour when all is making ready for die 
advent of the new form of force that mankind is waiting for. Nature, always 
reluctant to yield her secrets, is listening to the demands made upon her by 
her master, necessity. The coal mines of the world cannot long afford die 
increasing drain made upon them. Steam has reached its utmost limits of 
power, and does not fulfil the requirements of the age. It knows that its days 
are numbered. Electricity holds back, with bated breath, dependent upon the 
approach of her sister colleague. Air ships are riding at anchor, as it were, 
waiting for the force which is to make aerial navigation something more than 
a dream. As easily as men communicate with their offices from their homes 
by means of the telephone, so will the inhabitants of separate continents talk 
across the ocean. Imagination is palsied when seeking to foresee the grand 
results of this marvelous discovery, when once it is applied to art and mechanics^ 
In taking the throne which it will force steam to abdicate, dynaspheric force 
will rule the world with a power so mighty in the interests of civilization, that 
no finite mind can conjecture the results. Laurence Oliphant, in his preface 
to " Scientific Religion," says : "A new moral future is dawning upon the homaii 
race — one, certainly, of which it stands so much in need." In no way could dm 



INTHR-ETHERIC WAVES 561 

new moral future be so widely, so universally, commenced as by the utilizing 
of dynaspheric force to beneficial purposes in life. . . . 

The Occultists are ready to admit all this with the eloquent writer. 
Molecular vibration is, undeniably, " Keely's legitimate field of re- 
search," and the discoveries made by him will prove wonderful — yet 
only in his hands and through himself. The world so far will get but 
that with which it can be safely entrusted. The truth of this assertion 
has, perhaps, not yet quite dawned upon the discoverer himself, since 
he writes that he is absolutely certain that he will accomplish all that 
he has promised, and will then give it out to the world; but it must 
dawn upon him, and at no very far distant date. And what he says 
in reference to his work is a good proof of it: — 

In considering the operation of my engine, the visitor, in order to have 
even an approximate conception of its modus operandi, must discard all thought 
of engines that are operated upon the principle of pressure and exhaustion, by 
the expansion of steam or other analogous gas iiuhich impinges upon an abut- 
ment, such as the piston of a steam-engine. My engine has neither piston nor 
eccentrics, nor is there one grain of pressure exerted in the engine, whatever 
may be the size or capacity of it 

My system, in every part and detail, both in the developing of my power 
and in every branch of its utilization, is based and founded on sympathetic inbra- 
tion. In no other way would it be possible to awaken or develop my force, and 
equally impossible would it be to operate my engine upon any other principle. 
. . . This, however, is the true system; and henceforth all my operations 
will be conducted in this manner — that is to say, my power will be generated, 
my engines run, my cannon operated, through a wire, 

... It has been only after years of incessant labor, and the making of almost 
innumerable experiments, involving not only the construction of a great many 
most peculiar mechanical structures, and the closest investigation and study of 
the phenomenal properties of the substance "ether," per se, produced, that I 
have been able to dispense with complicated mechanism, and to obtain, as I 
claim, mastery over the subtle and strange force with which I am dealing. 

The passages underlined by us, are those which bear directly on the 
occult side of the application of the vibratory force, or what Mr. Keely 
calls " sympathetic vibration." The "wire" is already a step below, or 
downward from the pure etheric plane into the terrestrial. The dis- 
coverer has produced marvels — the word "miracle" is not too strong 
— when acting through the inter-etheric Force alone, the fifth and 
sixth principles of Akasa. From a " generator " six feet long, he has 
come down to one " no larger than an old-fashioned silver watch " ; 
and this by itself is a miracle of mechanical (but not spiritual) genius. 
But, as well expressed by his great patroness and defender, Mrs. 
Bloomfield-Moore, " the two forms of force which he has been experi- 
menting with, and the phenomena attending them, are the very anti- 



5(S2 THIS SECRET DOCTRINE 

thesis of each other." One was generated and acted upon by and 
through himself. No one, who should have repeated the thing done by 
himself, could have produced the same results. It was " Kccl/s ether " 
that acted truly, while "Smith's or Brown's" ether would have remained 
for ever barren of results. For Keely's difficulty has hitherto been to 
produce a machine which would develop and r^;ulate the " force " with- 
out the intervention of any " will power " or perscmal influence, whether 
conscious or tmconscious of the operator. In this he has failed, so far 
as others were concerned, for no one but himself could operate on his 
** machines." Occultly this was a far more advanced achievement than 
the "success" which he anticipates from his " wire," but the results 
obtained from the fifth and sixth planes of the etheric (or Astral) 
Force, will never be permitted to serve for purposes of commerce and 
traffic. That Keely's organism is directly connected with the produc- 
tion of the marvelous results is proven by the following statement 
emanating from one who knows the great discoverer intimately. 

At one time the shareholders of the " Keely Motor Co." put a man 
in his workshop for the express purpose of discovering his secret 
After six months of close watching, he said to J. W. Keely one day: 
" I know how it is done, now." They had been setting up a machine 
together, and Keely was manipulating the stop-cock which turned the 
force on and oflF. " Try it, then," was the answer. The man turned 
the cock, and nothing came. " Let me see you do it again," the man 
said to Keely. The latter complied, and the machinery operated at 
once. Again the other tried, but without success. Then Keely put 
his hand on his shoulder and told him to try once more. He did so, 
with the result of an instantaneous production of the current This 
fact, if true, settles the question. 

We are told that Mr. Keely defines electricity " as a certain form of 
atomic vibration." In this he is quite right ; but this is electricity on 
the terrestrial plane, and through terrestrial correlations. He esti- 
mates : — 

Molecular vibrations at 100,000,000 per second 

Inter-molecular „ „ 200ffJ0,(XXi „ „ 

Atomic „ „ 900,000,000 „ „ 

Inter-atomic „ „ 2,700,000,000 „ 

Aetheric „ „ 8,100,000.000 „ 

Inter-Aetheric „ „ 24,300,000.000 „ 

This proves our point There are no vibrations that could be 
counted or even estimated at an approximate rate beyond " the realm 
of the fourth son of Fohat," using an occult phraseology, or that 
motion which corresponds to the formation of Mr. Crookes' 



A PREMATURE DISCOVERY 563 

matter, or lightly called some years ago the " fourth state of matter ** 
— on this our plane. 

If the question is asked why Mr. Keely was not allowed to pass a 
certain limit, the answer is easy; because that which he has uncon- 
sciously discovered, is the terrible sidereal Force, known to, and named 
by the Atlanteans mash-mak^ and by the Aryan Rishis in their Ashlar 
Vidyd by a name that we do not like to give. It is the vril of Bulwer 
Ljrtton's " Coming Race," and of the coming races of our mankind. 
The name vril may be a fiction ; the Force itself is a fact doubted as 
little in India as the existence itself of their Rishis, since it is men- 
tioned in all the secret works. 

It is this vibratory Force, which, when aimed at an army from an 
Agni Ratha fixed on a flying vessel, a balloon, according to the instruc- 
tions found in Ashtar Vidyd, reduced to ashes 100,000 men and ele- 
phants, as easily as it would a dead rat. It is allegorized in the Vishnu 
Purana, in the Ramdyana and other works, in the fable about the sage 
Kapila whose glance made a motmtain of ashes of King Sagara's 60,000 
sons, and which is explained in the esoteric works, and referred to as 
the Kapilaksha — "Kapila's Eye." 

And is it this Satanic Force that our generations were to be allowed 
to add to their stock of Anarchist's baby-toys, known as melinite, 
dynsLxnitt clock-works, explosive oranges, "flower baskets," and such 
other innocent names? Is it this destructive agency, which, once in 
the hands of some modem Attila, e, g., a blood-thirsty anarchist, would 
reduce Europe in a few days to its primitive chaotic state with no man 
left alive to tell the tale — is this force to become the common property 
of all men alike? 

What Mr. Keely has already done is grand and wonderful in the 
extreme ; there is enough work before him in the demonstration of his 
new system to " humble the pride of those scientists who are mater- 
ialistic, by revealing those mysteries which lie behind the world of 
matter," without revealing it nolens volens to all. For surely Psychists 
and Spiritualists — of whom there are a good number in the European 
armies — would be the first to experience personally the fruits of such 
mysteries revealed. Thousands of them would find themselves (and 
perhaps with the populations of whole countries to keep them company) 
in blue Ether very soon, were such a Force to be even entirely discov- 
ered, let alone made publicly known. The discovery in its completeness 
is by several thousand — or shall we say hundred thousand? — years 
too premature. It will be at its appointed place and time only when 
the great roaring flood of starvation, misery, and underpaid labor ebbs 
back again — as it will when happily at last the just demands of the 
many are attended to ; when the proletariat exists but in name, and the 



564 'f HH SeCKET DOCTRINE 

pitiful cry for bread, that rings throughout the world unheeded, has 
died away. This may be hastened by the spread of learning, and by 
new openings for work and emigration, with better prospects than exist 
now, and on some new continent that may appear. Then only will 
" Keely's Motor and Force," as originally contemplated by himself and 
friends, be in demand, because */ will be more needed by the poor than 
by the wealthy. 

Meanwhile the force discovered by him will work through wires, 
and this, if he succeeds, will be quite sufficient in the present generation 
to make of him the greatest discoverer of this age. 

What Mr. Keely says of Sound and Color is also correct from the 
Occult stand-point. Hear him talk as though he were the nursling of 
the " Gods-revealers," and had gazed all his life into the depths of 
Father-Mother Aether. 

In comparing the tenuity of the atmosphere with that of the etheric 
flows, obtained by him from his invention for breaking up the mole- 
cules of air by vibration, Keely says that : — 

It is as platina to hydrogen gas. Molecular separation of air brings us to 
the first sub-division only ; inter-molecular, to the second ; atomic to the third ; 
inter-atomic, to the fourth; etheric, to the fifth; and inter-etheric, to the 
sixth sub-division, or positive association with luminiferous ether.** In my 
introductory argument I have contended that this is the vibratory envelope 
of all atoms. In my definition of atom I do not confine msrself to the sixth sob- 
division where this luminiferous ether is developed in its crude form as far as 
my researches prove.** I think this idea will be pronounced by the phjrsicssts 
of the present day, a wild freak of the imagination. Possibly, in time, a light 
may fall upon this theory that will bring its simplicity forward for scientific 
research. At present I can only compare it to some planet in a dark space, 
where the light of the sun of science has not yet reached it . . . 

I assume that sound, like odor, is a real substance of unknown and wonder- 
ful tenuity, emanating from a. body where it has been induced by percossioQ 
and throwing out absolute corpuscles of matter, inter-atomic particles, with 
velocity of 1120 feet per second; in vacuo 20,000. The substance which is thus 
disseminated is a part and parcel of the mass agitated, and, if kept under this 
agitation continuously, would, in the course of a certain cycle of time, become 
thoroughly absorbed by the atmosphere; or, more truly, would pass throach 
the atmosphere to an elevated point of tenuity corresponding to the cooditioo 
of sub-division that governs its liberation from its parent body. . . . 

The sounds from vibratory forks, set so as to produce etheric chords, wiule 
disseminating their tones (compound), permeate most thoroughly all sab- 
stances that come under the range of their atomic bombardment The dapph^ 
of a bell in vacuo liberates these atoms with the same velocity and voHime 



86J. This alto is the diTisiofi, made by beyond, whidi begins the 
the Occultists, under other nsmes. from the 6rst to the last, oo 

864. Quite so, since there is the trvtntk higlier plane. 



THE SECRETS OF SOUND AND ODOR 565 

as one in the open air; and were the agitation of the bdl kept up continuously 
for a few millions of centuries it would thoroughly return to its primitive ele- 
ment; and, if the chamber were hermetically sealed, and strong enough, the 
vacuous volume surrounding the bell would be brought to a pressure of many 
thousands of pounds to the square inch, by the tenuous substance evolved. In 
my estiniation, sound truly defined is the disturbance of atomic equilibrium, 
rupturing actual atomic corpuscles; and the substance thus liberated must cer- 
tainly be a certain order of etheric flow. Under these conditions, is it unreas- 
onable to suppose that, if this flow were kept up, and the body thus robbed of 
its element, it would in time disappear entirely? All bodies are formed primi- 
tively from this highly tenuous ether, animal, vegetable, and mineral, and they 
are only returned to their high gaseous condition when brought under a state 
of differential equilibrium. . . . 

As regards odor, we can only get some definite idea of its extreme and 
wondrous tenuity by taking into consideration that a large area of atmosphere 
can be impregnated for a long series of years from a single grain of musk; 
which, if weighed after that long interval, will be found to be not appreciably 
diminished. The great paradox attending the flow of odorous particles is that 
they can be held under conflnement in a glass vessel I Here is a substance of 
much higher tenuity than the glass that holds it, and yet it cannot escape. It is 
as a sieve with its meshes large enough to pass marbles, and yet holding flne 
sand which cannot pass through; in fact, a molecular vessel holding an atomic 
substance. This is a problem that would confound those who stop to recognize 
it But inflnitely tenuous as odor is, it holds a very crude relation to the sub- 
stance of sub-division that governs a magnetic flow (a flow of sjrmpathy, if you 
please to call it so). This sub-division comes next to sound, but is above sound. 
The action of the flow of a magnet coincides somewhat to the receiving and dis- 
tributing portion of the human brain, giving off at all times a depreciating ratio 
of the amount received. It is a grand illustration of the control of mind over 
matter, which gradually depreciates the physical till dissolution takes place. 
The magnet on the same ratio gradually loses its power and becomes inert. If 
the relations that exist between mind and matter could be equated and so held, 
we would live on in our physical state eternally, as there would be no physical 
depreciation. But this physical depreciation leads, at its terminus, to the source 
of a much higher development — viz. the liberation of the pure ether from the 
crude molecular; which, in my estimation, is to be much desired.** 

It may be remarked that, save a few small divergencies, no Adept 
nor Alchemist could have explained the above any better, in the light of 
tnodem Science, however much the latter may protest against the novel 
views. This is, in all its fundamental principles, if not details, Occult- 
ism pure and simple, yet withal, modem natural philosophy as well. 

This " New Force," or whatever Science may call it, the effects of 
which are undeniable — admitted by more than one naturalist and 
physicist who has visited Mr. Kecly's laboratory and witnessed person- 

86S. From Mrs. Bloomfield-Moore't paper, Thg New PhUofophy, 



566 



THE SECRET DOCTRINE 



ally its tremendous effects — what is it? Is it a "mode of motion," also, 
** in Vacuo/* since there is no matter to generate it except Sound — 
another " mode of motion," no doubt, a sensation caused like color by 
vibrations ? Fully as we believe in these vibrations as the proximate — 
the immediate — cause of such sensations, we as absolutely reject the 
one-sided scientific theory that there is no factor to be considered as 
external to us, other than etheric or atmospheric vibrations."' 

There is a transcendental set of causes put in motion — so to speak 
— in the occurrence of these phenomena, which, not being in relation 
to our narrow range of cognition, can only be traced to their source 
and their nature, and understood by the Spiritual faculties of the 
Adept. They are, as Asklepios puts it to the King, " incorporeal cor- 
porealities " — such as " appear in the mirror," and " abstract forms " 
that we see, hear, and smell, in our dreams, and visions. What have 
the "modes of motion," light, and ether to do with these? Yet we 
see, hear, and smell, and touch them, ergo they are as much realities to 
us in our dreams, as any other thing on this plane of Maya. 



XI 

ON THE ELEMENTS AND ATOMS 

FROM THE STAND-POINT OF SCIENCE AND THAT OF OCCULTISM 

When the Occultist speaks of " Elements," and of human Beings 
who lived during those geological ages, the duration of which it is 
found as impossible to determine, according to the opinion of one of 



866. In this case the American " Substan- 
tialists" are not wrong (though too anthropo- 
morphic and material in their views to be 
accepted by the Occultists) when arguing 
through Mrs. M. S. Organ, u, d., that 
" there must be positive entitative proper- 
ties in objects which have a constitutional 
relation to the nerves of animal sensations, 
or there can be no perception. No impression 
of any kind can be madt upon brain, nerve, 
or mind — no stimulus to action — unless 
there is an actual and direct communication 
of a substanUal force." ["Substantial" as 
far as it appears ki the usual sense of the 
word in this universe of illusion and icAvA, 
of course; not so in reality, 2 " That force 
may be the most refined and sublimated im- 



material Entity [?]. Yet it must exist; for 
no sense, element, or faculty of the hunuui 
being can have a perception, or be stimu- 
lated into action, without some substantial 
force coming in contact with it This is 
the fundamental law pervading the whole 
organic and mental world. In the true phil- 
osophical sense there is no sudi thing as 
independent action: for every force or sub* 
stance is correlated to some other force or 
substance. We can with just as much truth 
and reason assert that no substance possesses 
any inherent gustatory property or any ol- 
factory property — that taste and odor are 
simply sensations caused by vibrations; and 
hence mere illusions of animal percep- 
tions ..." 



METAPHYSICAI, CHEMISTRY 567 

the best English geologists,®" as the nature of matter, it is because he 
knows what he is talking about. When he says " Man " and Elements, 
he neither means " man " in his present physiological and anthropologi- 
cal form, nor the elemental atoms, those hypothetical conceptions, the 
entitative abstractions of matter in its highly attenuated state, as exist- 
ing at present in scientific minds ; nor, again, the compotmd Elements 
of antiquity. In Occultism the word Element means " rudiment " in 
every case. When we say " Elementary Man," we mean either the 
proemial, incipient sketch of man, in its unfinished and undeveloped 
condition, hence in that form which now lies latent in physical man 
during his life-time, and takes shape only occasionally and imder cer- 
tain conditions; or that form which for a time survives the material 
body, and which is better known as an " Elementary." "•" With regard 
to " Element," when the term is used metaphysically, it means, in dis- 
tinction to the mortal, the incipient divine man; and, in its physical 
usage, inchoate matter in its first undifferentiated condition, or in the 
laya state, which is the eternal and the normal condition of substance, 
differentiating only periodically, and is during that differentiation in an 
o^orma/ state — in other words, a transitory illusion of the senses. 

As to the " elemental atoms," so called, the Occultists refer to them 
by that name with a meaning analogous to that which is given by the 
Hindu to Brahma when he calls him Anu, the "Atom." Every ele- 
mental atom, in search of which more than one Chemist has followed 
the path indicated by the Alchemists, is, in their firm belief (when not 
knozvledge), a soul; not necessarily a disembodied soul, but a jtva, as 
the Hindus call it, a center of potential vitality, with latent intelli- 
gence in it, and, in the case of compound Souls — an intelligent active 
EXISTENCE, from the highest to the lowest order, a form composed of 
more or less differentiations. It requires a metaphysician — and an 
Eastern metaphysician — to understand our meaning. All those atom- 
Souls are differentiations from the one, and in the same relation to it 
as the divine Soul — the Buddhi — to its informing and inseparable 
Spirit, or Atman. 

Modem physics, while borrowing from the ancients their atomic 
theory, forgot one point, the most important of the doctrine ; hence they 
got only the husks and will never be able to get at the kernel. They 
left behind, in the adoption of physical atoms, the suggestive fact that 

867. In answer to « friend, that eminent years, or even into millenniums." (Signed 
geologist writes: " I can only say, in reply WiUiam Pengelly. r. i. s.) 

to your letter, that it is at present, and per- , ?^- J?'*^ speaking of the irrational, tur- 

. , .,, . . bulent Clements ** composed of fire, air, wa- 

b.p. .Ion will be, .HF0S8..W to reduce. ^,, ,„j ..^h." oe». ElemenUry Daemon.. 

CTcn approxiiulely, geological tine into (See Timaiot.) 



568 



THE SECBST DOCTRINB 



from Anaxagoras down to Epicurus, the Roman Lucretius, and finally 
even to Galileo, all those Philosophers believed more or less in animated 
atoms, not in invisible specks of so-called " brute " matter. Rotatory 
motion was generated in their views, by larger (read, more divine and 
pure) atoms forcing downwards other atoms; the lighter ones being 
thrust simultaneously upward. The esoteric meaning of this is the ever 
cyclic curve downward and upward of differentiated elements through 
intercyclic phases of existence, until each reaches again its starting 
point or birthplace. The idea was metaphysical as well as physical; 
the hidden interpretation embracing "gods" or souls, in the shape of 
atoms, as the causes of all the effects produced on Earth by the secre- 
tions from the divine bodies."** No ancient philosopher, not even the 
Jewish Kabalists, ever dissociated Spirit from matter or vice versa. 
Everything originated in the one, and, proceeding from the one, must 
finally return to the One. " Light becomes heat, and consolidates into 
fiery particles ; which, from being ignited, become cold, hard particles, 
round and smooth. And this is called Soul, imprisoned in its robe of 
matter " ; ®^® Atoms and Souls having been synonymous in the lan- 
guage of the Initiates. The "whirling Souls," Gilgoolem, a doctrine 
in which so many learned Jews have believed,®^^ had no other meaning 
esoterically. The learned Jewish Initiates never meant by the " Prom- 
ised land " Palestine alone, but the same Nirvana as the learned Bud- 
dhist and Brahman do — the bosom of the Eternal One, symbolized 
by that of Abraham, and by Palestine as its substitute on Earth."^* The 
passage of the Soul-Atom " through the Seven Planetary Chambers " 
had the same metaphysical and also physical meaning. It had the 
latter when it was said to dissolve into Ether?''^ Even Epicurus, 
the model Atheist and materialist, knew and believed so much in the 
ancient Wisdom, that he taught that the Soul (entirely distinct from 



869. Plato uses the words "stcr^Hofu^' of 
tOrbulent ElcmentB iTimaios), 

870. Valentinus' BsoUric Trtatist on the 
Doctrine of Gilgul. 

871. See Mackenzie's Royal Masonic Cy- 
ehpaedia. 

872. Surely no educated Jew ever be- 
lieved the literal sense of this allegory — 
namely, that " the bodies of Jews deposited 
in foreign lands contain within them a prin- 
ciple of Soul which cannot rest, until by a 
process called the ' whirling of the Soul ' 
the immortal particle reaches once more the 
sacred Soil of the 'Promised Land.'" The 
meaning is evident to an occultist. The pro- 
cess was supposed to be accomplished by a 
kind of metempsychosis, the psychic spark 
being conveyed through bird, beast, fish, and 



the most minute insect (See Royal Masonic 
Cyclopaedia, Mackenzie.) The allegory re- 
lates to the atoms of the body, which have 
each to pass through every form before all 
reach the final state, which is the first start- 
ing point of the departure of every atom — 
its primitive laya State. But the primitive 
meaning of Gilgoolem, or " Revolution of 
Souls," was the idea of the re-incarnating 
Souls or Sgos» "All the Souls go into the 
gilgoolah," into a cyclic or revolving pro- 
cess; t. e, they all proceed on the cyclic path 
of re-births. Some Kabalists interpret this 
doctrine to mean only a kind of purgatory 
for the souls of the wicked. But this ia 
not so. 

873. See Isis Unveiled, VoL I, 
297. 



PANTHEISM VERSUS MATERIALISM 569 

immortal Spirit when the former is enshrined latent in it, as it is in 
every atomic speck), was composed of a fine, tender essence, formed 
from the smoothest, roundest, and finest atoms. 

And this shows that the ancient Initiates, who were followed more 
or less closely by all profane antiquity, meant by the term "atom," a 
Soul, a Genius or Angel, the first-bom of the ever-concealed cause of 
all causes; and in this sense their teachings become comprehensible. 
They claimed, as do their successors, the existence of Gods and Genii, 
angels or "demons," not outside, or independent of, the Universal 
Plenum, but within it. Only this Plenum, during the life-cycles, is 
infinite. They admitted and taught a good deal of that which modem 
Science teaches now — namely, the existence of a primordial " World- 
stuflF or Cosmic Substance," from which worlds are formed, ever and 
etemally homogeneous, except during its periodic existence, when it 
differentiates its universal diffusion throughout infinite space; and 
the gradual formation of sidereal bodies from it. They taught the 
revolution of the Heavens, the Earth's rotation, the Heliocentric Sys- 
tem, and the Atomic Vortices — Atoms — in reality Souls and intelli- 
gences. But those "Atomists" were spiritual, most transcendental, 
and philosophical Pantheists. It is not they who would have ever 
conceived, or dreamt that monstrous contrasted progeny, the nightmare 
of our modern civilized Race; namely — inanimate material, self- 
guiding atoms, on the one hand, and an extra-Cosmic God on the 
other. 

It may be useful to show what, in the teachings of the old Initiates, 
the Monad was, and what its origin. 

Modem exact Science, as soon as it began to grow out of its teens, 
perceived the great, and, to it, hitherto esoteric axiom, that nothing — 
whether in the spiritual, psychic, or physical realm of being — could 
come into existence out of nothing. There is no cause in the mani- 
fested universe without its adequate effects, whether in space or time ; 
nor can there be an effect without its primal cause, which itself owes 
Its existence to a still higher one — the final and absolute cause hav- 
ing to remain to man for ever an incomprehensible Causeless Cause. 
But even this is no solution, and must be viewed, if at all, from the 
highest philosophical and metaphysical standpoints, otherwise the prob- 
lem had better be left unapproached. It is an abstraction, on the verge 
of which human reason — however trained to metaphysical subtleties 
— trembles, threatening to collapse. This may be demonstrated to any 
European who would undertake to solve the problem of existence by 
the articles of faith of the true Vedantin, for instance. Let him read 
and study the sublime teachings on the subject of Soul and Spirit, of 



570 



THE SECRET DOCTRINE 



§ankaracharya {Viveka Chudatnani),^^ and the reader will realize 
what is now said. 

While the Christian is taught that the human soul is a breath of 
God — being created by him for sempiternal existence, i, e., having a 
beginning, but no end (and therefore never to be called eternal) — the 
Occult teaching says, "Nothing is created, but is only transformed. 
Nothing can manifest itself in this universe — from a globe down to a 
vague, rapid thought — that was not in the universe already; every- 
thing on the subjective plane is an eternal is; as everything on the 
objective plane is an ever becoming — because transitory." 

The monad — a truly " indivisible thing," as defined by Good, who 
did not give it the sense we now do — is here rendered as the Atmd in 
conjunction with Buddhi and the higher Manas. This trinity is one 
and eternal, the latter being absorbed in the former at the termination 
of all conditioned and illusive life. The monad then, can be traced 
through the course of its pilgrimage and its changes of transitory veh- 
icles only from the incipient stage of the manifested Universe. In 
Pralaya, or the intermediate period between two manvantaras, it loses 
its name, as it loses it when the real one self of man merges into Brahm 
in cases of high Samadhi (the Turtya state) or final Nirvana; " when 
the disciple " in the words of Sankara, " having attained that primeval 
consciousness, absolute bliss, of which the nature is truth, which is 
without form and action, abandons this illusive body that has been 
assumed by the dtm& just as an actor (abandons) the dress (put on)." 
For Buddhi (the Anandamaya sheath) is but a mirror which reflects 
absolute bliss ; and, moreover, that reflection itself is not yet free from 
ignorance, and is not the Supreme Spirit, being subject to conditions, 
being a spiritual modification of Prakriti, and an eflFect ; Atmd alone is 
the one real and eternal substratum of all — the essence and absolute 
knowledge — the Kshetrajna.^''^ It is called in the Esoteric philosophy 



874. Translated for the Theosophist, by 
Mohini M. Chatterji as "Crest Jewel of 
Wisdom/' 1886. (See Theosoptnst, July and 
August numbers). 

875. Now that the revised version of the 
gospels has been published and the most 
glaring mistranslations of the old versions 
are corrected, one will understand better 
the words in I John v. 6 and 7: "It is 
the Spirit that beareth witness because the 
Spirit is the truth." The words that follow 
in the mistranslated version about the " three 
witnesses," — hitherto supposed to stand for 
" the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost*' 



— show the real meaning of the writer (St. 
John) very clearly, thus still more forcibly 
identifjring his teaching in this respect widi 
that of Sankaricharya. For what can the 
sentence, "there are three who bear witness: 
the Spirit and the Water and the Blood" 

— mean, if they bear no relation to, or con- 
nexion with, the more philosophical state- 
ment of the great Vedanta teacher, who 
speaking of the sheaths (the principles in 
man) Jlva, VijHdnamaya, etc. which are, 
in their physical manifestation, " water and 
blood " or life, adds that &tm& (spirit) alone 
16 what remains after the subtraction of the 



THE DIAMOND HEART 571 

" the One Witness," and, while it rests in Devachan, is referred to as 
" the Three Witnesses to Karma." 

Atmd (our seventh principle) being identical with the universal Spirit, 
and man being one with it in his essence, what is then the Monad 
proper? It is that homogeneous spark which radiates in millions of 
rays from the primeval " Seven " ; — of which seven further on. It is 
the EMANATING Spark from the uncreated Ray — a mystery. In the 
esoteric, and even exoteric Buddhism of the North, Adi Buddha (Chogi 
dang pot sangye), the One unknown, without beginning or end, identi- 
cal with Parabrahm and Ain-Soph, emits a bright ray from its darkness. 

This is the Logos (the first), or Vajradhara, the Supreme Buddha 
(also called Dorjechang). As the Lord of all Mysteries he cannot 
manifest, but sends into the world of manifestation his heart — the 
" diamond heart," Vajrasattva (Dorjesempa). This is the second logos 
of creation, from whom emanate the seven (in the exoteric blind the 
five) Dhyani Buddhas, called the Anupadaka, " the parentless." These 
Buddhas are the primeval monads from the world of incorporeal being, 
the ArUpa world, wherein the Intelligences (on that plane only) have 
neither shape nor name, in the exoteric system, but have their distinct 
seven names in esoteric philosophy. These Dhyani Buddhas emanate, 
or create from themselves, by virtue of Dhyana, celestial Selves — the 
superAiMmaLii Bodhisattvas. These incarnating at the beginning of 
every human cycle on earth as mortal men, become occasionally, owing 
to their personal merit, Bodhisattvas among the Sons of Humanity, 
after which they may re-appear as Mdnushi (human) Buddhas. The 
Anupadaka (or Dhyani-Buddhas) are thus identical with the Brahman- 
ical Manasaputra, "mind-born sons" — whether of Brahma or either 
of the other two Trimurtian Hypostases, hence identical also with the 
Rishis and Prajapatis. Thus, a passage is found in Anugtta, which, 
read esoterically, shows plainly, though under another imagery, the 
same idea and system. It says: — 

Whatever entities (there arc) in this world, movable or immovable, they arc 
the very first to be dissolved [at pralaya] ; and next the developments produced 
from the elements [from which the visible Universe is fashioned] ; and (after) 
these developments [evolved entities], all the elements. Such is the upward 
gradation among entities. Gods, Men, Gandharvas, Pi^chas, Asuras, Rakshasas, 
all have been created by Svabhava [Prakriti, or plastic nature], not by actions, 
nor by a cause — [i.e., not by any physical cause]. 

These Brahmanas [the Rishi Prajapati?], the creators of the world, are 
bom here [on earth] again and again. Whatever is produced from them is 

gbeaths and that it is the oin.Y ttntness, or a trinity, made three witneiaea oat of " one.** 
gyntbesixed unity. The leaa tpirittial and thus connecting it more with earth than with 
philoflophical school, solely with an eye to heaven. 



572 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

dissolved in due time in those very five great elements [the five, or rather seven, 
Dhyani Buddhas, also called "Elements" of Mankind], like billows in the ocean. 
These great elements are in every way (beyond) the elements that make np the 
world [the gross elements]. And he who is released even from these five 
elements [the tanmatras] *" goes to the highest goal.*^ 

" The Lord Prajapati [Brahma] created all this by the mind only,'* 
I. e,, by Dhyana, or abstract meditation and mystic powers like the 
Dhyani Buddhas (vide supra). Evidently, then, these "Brahmanas" 
are identical with the Bodhisattvas (the terrestrial) of the heavenly 
Dhyani Buddhas. Both, as primordial, intelligent "'Elements," become 
the creators or the emanators of the monads destined to become human 
in that cycle ; after which they evolve themselves, or, so to say, expand 
into their own selves as Bodhisattvas or Brahmanas, in heaven and 
earth, to become at last simple men — " the creators of the world are 
bom here, on earth again and again" — truly. In the Northern 
Buddhist system, or the popular exoteric religion, it is taught that every 
Buddha, while preaching the good law on earth, manifests himself 
simultaneously in three worlds : in the formless, as Dhyani Buddha, in 
the World of forms, as a Bodhisattva, and in the world of desire, the 
lowest (or our world) as a man. Esoterically the teaching differs: 
The divine purely Adi-Buddhic monad manifests as the universal 
Buddhi (the Maha-buddhi or Mahat in Hindu philosophies) the spir- 
itual, omniscient and omnipotent root of divine intelligence, the highest 
anima mundi or the Logos. This descends " like a flame spreading from 
the eternal Fire, immovable, without increase or decrease, ever the same 
to the end " of the cycle of existence, and becomes universal life on the 
Mundane Plane. From this plane of conscious Life shoot out, like seven 
fiery tongues, the Sons of Light (the logoi of Life) ; then the Dhyani- 
Buddhas of contemplation: the concrete forms of their formless 
Fathers — the Seven Sons of Light, still themselves, to whom may be 
applied the Brahmanical mystic phrase : " Thou art ' that ' — Brahm,'* 
It is from these Dhyani-Buddhas that emanate their chhdyds (Shad- 
ows) the Bodhisattvas of the celestial realms, the prototypes of the 
super-terrestrial Bodhisattvas, and of the terrestrial Buddhas, and 
finally of men. The " Seven Sons of Light " are also called " Stars." 

The star under which a human Entity is bom, says the Occult 
teaching, will remain for ever its star, throughout the whole cycle of 
its incarnations in one Manvantara. But this is not his astrological star. 
The latter is concerned and connected with the personality, the former 

876. The Tmnmltras are literally the type aenae gWen to the term in antlqnity, net la 

or rudiment of an element devoid of qoali- that of phyaics. They are the logol, ikt 

tiea; but ciotericalty, they are the primeval seven emanations or raya of the Io«oc 

noumtnci of that which becomes in the pro- 876a. Telanf'i traniUtiott, pafct 3t7, 

gnu of evolution a Coamlc element in the J88. 



THE CREST-jEWEt OF WISDOM 



573 



with the iNDiviDUAUTY. The "Angel" of that Star, or the Dhyani- 
Buddha will be either the guiding or simply the presiding "Angel," so 
to say, in every new rebirth of the monad, which is part of his own 
essence, though his vehicle, man, may remain for ever ignorant of this 
fact The adepts have each their Dhyani-Buddha, their elder "twin 
Soul," and they know it, calling it " Father-Soul," and " Father-Fire." 
It is only at the last and supreme initiation, however, that they learn it 
when placed face to face with the bright " Image." How much has 
Bulwer Lytton known of this mystic fact when describing, in one of his 
highest inspiraticmal moods, Zanoni face to face with his Augoeidesf 

The Logos, or both the unmanifested and the manifested Word, is 
called by the Hindus Isvara, " the Lord," though the Occultists give it 
another name. Isvara, say the Vedantins, is the highest consciousness 
in nature. " This highest consciousness," answer the Occultists, " is 
only a synthetic unit in the world of the manifested Logos — or on the 
plane of illusion; for it is the sum-total of Dhyan-Chohanic conscious- 
nesses/' "Oh, wise man, remove the conception that not-Spirit is Spirit/' 
says Sankaracharya. Atma is not-Spirit in its final ParaJ>rahmic state, 
tSvara or Logos is Spirit ; or, as Occultism explains, it is a compound 
unity of manifested living Spirits, the parent-source and nursery of all 
the mundane and terrestrial monads, plus their divine reflection, which 
emanate from, and return into, the Logos, each in the culmination of 
its time. There are seven chief groups of such Dhyan Chohans, which 
groups will be found and recognized in every religion, for they are the 
primeval seven Rays. Humanity, occultism teaches us, is divided into 
seven distinct groups and their sub-divisions, mental, spiritual, and 
physical.*^^ The monad, then, viewed as one, is above the seventh 
principle (in Kosmos and man), and as a triad, it is the direct radiant 
progeny of the said compound unit, not the breath (and special cre- 
ation out of nihil) of " God," as that tmit is called ; for such an idea 
is quite tmphilosophical, and degrades Deity, dragging it down to a 
finite, attributive condition. As well expressed by the translator of 
the ^' Crest-Jewel of Wisdom " — though tivara is " God " " unchanged 
in the profoundest depths of pralayas and in the intensest activity of 
the manvantaras " . . . , still " beyond (him) is ' Atma,' rotmd whose 



877. Hence the leven chief plmnets. the 
spheres of the indwelling seven spirits, under 
each of which it bom one of the human 
groups which is guided and influenced there- 
by. There are only seven planets {sptcially 
connected with earth), and twelve houses, 
but the possible combinations of their aspects 
are countless. As each planet can stand to 
each of the others in twelve different aspects, 



their combinations must, therefore, be al* 
most infinite; as infinite, in fact, as the spir* 
itual, psychic mental, and physical capad- 
ties in the numberless varieties of the gtnus 
home, each of which varieties is bom under 
one of the seven planets and one of the sakl 
countless planetary combinationa. See Theo* 
sophist, for August, 1886. 



574 



THE SECRET DOCTRINE 



pavilion is the darkness of eternal MayA.""' The "triads" bom 
under the same Parent-planet, or rather the radiations of one and the 
same Planetary Spirit (Dhyani Buddha) are, in all their after lives 
and rebirths, sister, or " /z«nn-souls," on this Earth.*^* 

This was known to every high Initiate in every age and in every 
country : " I and my Father are one," said Jesus.**® When he is made 
to say elsewhere : **^ " I ascend to my Father and your Father," it 
meant that which has just been stated. It was simply to show that 
the group of his disciples and followers attracted to Him belonged to 
the same Dhyani Buddha, " Star," or " Father," again of the same 
planetary realm and division as He did. It is the knowledge of this 
occult doctrine that found expression in the review of The Idyll of 
the White Lotus, when Mr. T. Subba Rao wrote : 

Every Buddha meets at his last initiation all the great adepts who reached 
Buddhahood during the preceding ages . . . every class of adepts has its own 
bond of spiritual communion which knits them together. . . . The only possible 
and effectual way of entering into such brotherhood ... is by bringing one- 
self within the influence of the Spiritual light which radiates from one's own 
Logos, I may further point out here . . . that such communion is only possible 
between persons whose souls derive their life and sustenance from the same 
divine ray, and that, as seven distinct rays radiate from the " Central Spiritual 
Sun/' all adepts and Dhyan Chohans are divisible into seven classes, each of 
which is glided, controlled, and overshadowed by one of the seven forms or 
manifestations of the divine Wisdom."" 

It is then the " Seven Sons of Light " — called after their planets 
and (by the rabble) often identified with them — namely Saturn, Jupi- 



878. The now univenal error of attribut- 
ing to the ancients the knowledge of only 
•even planets, simply because they mentioned 
no others, is baaed on the same general ig- 
norance of their occult doctrines. The ques- 
tion is not whether they were, or were not, 
aware of the existence of the later discovered 
planeU; but whether the reverence paid by 
them to the four exoteric and three secret 
great gods — the star-angels, had not some 
special reason. The writer ventures to say 
there was such a reason, and it is this. 
Had they known of as many planets as we 
do now (and this question can hardly be 
decided at present, either way), they would 
have still connected with their religious wor- 
ship only the seven, because these seven are 
directly and specially connected with our 
earth, or, using esoteric phraseology, with 
our septenary ring of spheres. (See supra.) 

879. It is the same, only stUl more meU- 



physical idea, as that of the (Christian Trinity 
— "Three in One" — *.*, the Univeraal 
" over- Spirit," manifesting on the two hifl^ier 
planes, those of Buddht and Mahat; and 
these are the three hypostases, metaphysical, 
but never personal, 

880. John X. 30. The identity, and at the 
same time the illusive differentiation of the 
Angel-Mon&d and the Hitftian-Monad is shown 
by the following sentences: " My Father is 
greaser than I" {John xiv. 28); " Gk>rify 
your Father which is in Heaven " (,Matt, t. 
16); "The righteous will shine in the king- 
dom of their Father" (not our Father) 
iMatt. xiii. 43); "Know ye not ye are a 
temple of (k>d, and that the Spirit of Cod 
dwelleth in you?" (I Cor, UL 16); "I 
ascend to my Father," etc. etc. 

881. John XX. 17. 

882. Theosophist, August, 1886. 



WHAT ARE THE SEVEN PLANETS? 



575 



ter, Mercury, Mars, Venus, and — presumably for the modem critic, 
who goes no deeper than the surface of old religions**" — the Sun 
and Moon, which are, according to the Occult teachings, our heavenly 
Parents, or "Father," synthetically. Hence, as already remarked, 
polytheism is really more philosophical and correct, as to fact and 
nature, than anthropomorphic monotheism. Saturn, Jupiter, Mercury, 
and Venus, the four exoteric planets, and the three others which must 
remain unnamed, were the heavenly bodies in direct astral and psychic 
communication with the Earth, its Guides, and Watchers — morally 
and physically ; the visible orbs furnishing our Humanity with its out- 
ward and inward characteristics, and their " Regents " or Rectors with 
our Monads and spiritual faculties. In order to avoid creating new 
misconceptions, let it be stated that among the three secret orbs (or 
star-angels) neither Uranus nor Neptune entered; not only because 
they were unknown under these names to the ancient Sages, but be- 
cause they, as all other planets, however many there may be, are the gods 
and guardians of other septenary chains of globes within our systems. 

Nor do the two last discovered great planets depend entirely on the 
Sun like the rest of the planets. Otherwise, how explain the fact that 
Neptune receives 900 times less light than our Earth, and Uranus 390 
times less, and that their satellites show a peculiarity of inverse rota- 
tion found in no other planets of the Solar System. At any rate, 
what we say applies to Uranus, though recently the fact begins again 
to be disputed. 

This subject will, of course, be considered mere vagary by all those 
who confuse the universal order of being with their own systems of 
classification. Here, however, simple facts from Occult teachings are 
stated, to be either accepted or rejected, as the case may be. There 
are details which, on account of their great metaphysical abstractions, 
cannot be entered upon. Hence, we merely state that only seven of 
our planets are as intimately related to our globe, as the Sun is to all 
the bodies subject to him in his system. Of these bodies the poor little 
nimiber of primary and secondary planets known to astronomy, looks 



883. These are planets accepted for pur- 
poaes of judicial astrology only. The astro- 
tbeoffonical division differed from this one. 
The Sun» being a central star and no planet, 
standa in more occult and mysterious rela- 
tions with Us seven planets of our globe 
than is generally known. The Sun was, 
therefore, considered the great Father of 
all the Seven " Fathers," which accounts for 
the variations found between sev*n and tight 
great gods of the Chaldaean and other coun- 



tries. Neither the earth nor the moon — its 
satellite — nor yet stars, for another reason — 
were anything else than substitutes for eso- 
teric purposes. Yet, even with the Sun and 
the Moon thrown out of the calculation, the 
ancients seem to have known of seven plan- 
ets. How many more are known to us, so 
far, if we throw out the Earth and Moon? 
Seven, and no more: Seven primary or prin- 
cipal planets, the rest planetoids rather than 
planeta. 



576 



THE SECRET DOCTRINE 



wretched enough, in truth."* Therefore, it stands to reason that there 
are a great number of planets, small and large, that have not been 
discovered yet, but of the existence of which ancient astronomers — all 
of them initiated adepts — must have certainly been aware. But, as 
their relation to the gods was sacred, it had to remain arcane, as also 
the names of various other planets and stars. 

Besides which, even the Roman Catholic theology speaks of " seventy 
planets that preside over the destinies of the nations of this globe " ; 
and, save the erroneous application, there is more truth in this tradition 
than in exact modem astronomy. The seventy planets are connected 
with the seventy elders of the people of Israel"' because the regents 
of these planets are meant, not the orbs themselves; and the word 
seventy is a play and a blind upon the 7 x 7 of the subdivisions. Each 
people and nation, as said already, has its direct Watcher, Guardian 
and Father in Heaven — a Planetary Spirit. We are willing to leave 
their own national God, Jehovah, to the descendants of Israel, the 
worshipers of Sabaoth or Saturn; for, indeed, the monads of the 
people chosen by him are his own, and the Bible has never made a 
secret of it. Only the text of the English (Protestant) Bible is, in 
disagreement, as usual, with those of the Septuagint and the Vulgate. 
Thus, while in the former one reads :••• " When the most high (not 
Jehovah) divided to the nations their inheritance ... he set the 
bounds of the people according to the number of the children of 
Israel," in the Septuagint the text reads " according to the number of 
the Angels" (Planet- Angels), which is more concordant with truth 
and fact. Moreover, all the texts agree that *' the Lord's (Jehovah) 
portion is his people ; Jacob is the lot oi his inheritance " ; ••' and 
this settles the question. The " Lord " Jehovah took for his portion 
Israel — what have other nations to do with that particular national 
Deity ? Let then, the " angel Gabriel " watch over Iran and " Mikael- 
Jehovah " over the Hebrews. These are not the gods of other nations, 
and it is difficult to see why Christians should have selected a god 
against whose commandments Jesus was the first one to rise in rebellion. 

The Planetary origin of the Monad (Soul) and of its faculties was 



884. When one remembers that under 
the powerful telescope of Sir W. Herschel, 
that eminent astronomer, gauging merely that 
portion of heaven in the equatorial plane, 
the approximate center of which is occupied 
by our Earth — saw pass in one quarter of 
an hour, 16,000 stars; and applying this 
calculation to the toUlity of the "Milky. 
Way " he found in it no less than 18 (eight- 
een) millions of Suns — one wonders no 
longer that Laplace, in conversation with 



Napoleon I, should have called God a ht- 
POTRBSis — perfectly useless to speculate up- 
on for exact physical Science, at any rate. 
Occult metaphysics and transcendental philo- 
sophy will alone be able to lift the smallest 
corner of the impenetrable veil in this direc- 
tion. 

885. Numbers xi. 16. 

886. Deuteronomy joadL 8 and 9. 

887. Deuteronomy xxxii. 9. 



CYCLIC IfAJX 01? THE GODS S77 

taught by the Gnostics. On its way to the Earth, as on its way back 
from the Earth, each soul bom in, and from, the " Boundless Light," •" 
had to pass through the seven planetary regions both ways. The pure 
Dhyani and Devas of the oldest religions had become, in course of 
time, with the Zoroastrians, the Seven Devs, the ministers of Ahriman, 
" each chained to his planet " ; *•• with the Brahmans, the Asuras and 
some of its Rishis — good, bad and indifferent ; and among the Egyp- 
tian Gnostics it was Thoth (or Hermes) who was the chief of the 
seven whose names are given by Origen as Adonai, genius of the Sun ; 
Too, of the Moon; Bloi, of Jupiter; Sabao, of Mars; Orai, of Venus; 
Astaphai, of Mercury; and Ildabaoth (Jehovah), of Saturn. Finally, 
the PistiS'Sophia, which the greatest modern authority on exoteric 
Gnostic beliefs, the late Mr. C. W. King, refers to as " that precious 
monument of Gnosticism," — this old document echoes, while distort- 
ing it to sectarian purposes, the archaic belief of the ages. The Astral 
Rulers of the Spheres (the planets) create the monads (the Souls) 
from their own substance out of the "tears of their eyes, and the sweat 
of their torments," endowing the monads with a spark of the Divine 
Light, which is their substance. It will be shown in Book II why 
these " Lords of the Zodiac and Spheres " have been transformed by 
sectarian theology into the rebellious angels of the Christians, who 
took them from the Seven Devs of the Magi, without understanding 
the significance of the allegory.**® 

As usual, that which is and was from its beginning divine, pure, and 
spiritual in its earliest unity, became, by reason of its differentiation 
by the distorted prism of man's conceptions, human and impure, as 
reflecting man's own sinful nature. Thus, in time, the planet Saturn 
became reviled by the worshipers of other " gods." The nations bom 
under Satum — the Jewish, for instance — with whom he had become 
Jehovah, after having been held as a son of Satum, or Ilda-Baoth, by 
the Ophites, and in the book of Jasher — were eternally fighting with 
those bora under Jupiter, Mercury, or any other planet, except Saturn- 
Jehovah ; genealogies and prophecies notwithstanding, Jesus the initiate 
(or Jehoshua) — the type from whom the " historical " Jesus was 
copied — was not of pure Jewish blood, and thus recognized no Jeho- 
vah ; nor did he worship any planetary god beside his own " Father," 
whom he knew, and with whom he communed as every high initiate 
does, " Spirit to Spirit and Soul to Soul." This can hardly be taken 

888. C W. King identifies it with " that The Gnostics and Tksir Remains, p. 344. 

summum bonnm of Orientml aspiration, the 889. See Origen's Copy of the Chart 

Buddhist Nirvina/' perfect repose, the Epicii- 890. Vids Part II, "On the Seven SouU^; 

rean Indotentia, which looks flippant enough and Section xr in this Part," Gods, MoiTADt 

in its eaq»ression, though not quite untrue. and Atoms.** 



578 tnt sEc&^ DOCTRINE 

exception to, unless the critic explains to every erne's satisfaction the 
strange sentences put in the mouth of Jesus by the author of the 
Fourth Gospel (chapter viii. 37 et seq.) during his disputes with the 
Pharisees. 



I know ye are Abraham's seed."^ ... I speak the things which I have 
with my Father; and ye do the things which yc heard from your Father. . . . 
Ye do the works of your Father. ... Ye are of your Father, the DcviL . . - 
He was a murderer from the beginning, and stood not in the truth, because 
there is no truth in him. When one speaketh a lie he speaketh of his own; for 
his father also is a liar and the father thereof, etc. etc 

That " Father " of the Pharisees was Jehovah, because identical with 
Cain, Saturn, Vulcan, etc. — the planet imder which they were bom, 
and the God whom they worshiped. Evidently there must be an occult 
meaning sought in these words and admonitions, however mistrans- 
lated, since they are pronounced by one who threatened with hell-fire 
anyone who says simply raca (fool) to his brother .••* And evidently, 
again, the planets are not merely spheres, twinkling in Spiaice, and 
made to shine for no purpose, but the domains of various beings 
with whom the profane are so far tmacquainted ; nevertheless, having 
a mysterious, tmbroken, and powerful connexion with men and globes. 
Every heavenly body is the temple of a god, and these gods themselves 
are the temples of God, the Unlcnown " Not Spirit." There is nothing 
profane in the Universe. All Nature is a consecrated place, as Yoting 
says: — 

Each of these Stars is a religious house. 

Thus can all exoteric religions be shown the falsified copies of the 
esoteric teaching. It is the priesthood which has to be held responsible 
for the reaction in favor of materialism of our day. It is by worship- 
ing and enforcing on the masses the worship of the shells — personified 
for purposes of allegory — of pagan ideals, that the latest exoteric 
religion has made of Western lands a Pandemonitun in which the 
higher classes worship the golden calf, and the lower and ignorant 
masses are made to worship an idol with feet of clay. 

891. AbrabAm and Satim are identical in aatro-flymboloffy, and be it the ^ "> i f ^ * f tti 
of tbc JeboYiatie Jewa. 892. Umk^w, ▼. 23. 



ANTIQUITY OUR CREAT MASTER 579 

XII 
ANCIENT THOUGHT IN MODERN DRESS 

Modern Science is ancient thought distorted, and no more. 
We have seen, however, what intuitionai, scientists think, and 
are busy about ; and now the reader may be given a few more proofs 
of the fact that more than one F.R.S. is tmconsciously approaching 
the derided Secret Sciences. 

With regard to cosmogony and primeval matter, modem speculations 
are undeniably ancient thought, improved by contradictory theories of 
recent origin. But the whole foundation belongs to Grecian and Indian 
Archaic astronomy and physics, in those days always called philosophy. 
In all the Aryan and Greek speculations, one meets with the conception 
of an all-pervading, unorganized, and homogeneous matter, or Chaos, 
re-named by modern scientists " Nebular condition of the world-stuff." 
What Anaxagoras called '' Chaos " in his Homoiomereia is now called 
" primitive fluid " by Sir W. Thomson. The Hindu and Greek Atom- 
ists — Kanada, Leukippos, Demokritos, Epicurus, Lucretius, etc., etc, 
are now reflected as in a clear mirror, in the supporters of the atomic 
theory of our modem days, beginning with Leibnitz's Monads, and 
ending with the " Vortical Atoms " of Sir W. Thomson.**" Tme, the 
corpuscular theory of old is rejected, and the tmdulatory theory has 
taken its place. But the question is, whether the latter is so firmly estab- 
lished as not to be liable to be dethroned as was its predecessor f Light 
from its metaphysical aspect was fully treated of in " Isis Unveiled " : 

Light is the first begotten, and the first emanation of the Supreme, and Light 
is Life, says the Evangelist and the Kabalist. Both are electricity — the life 
principle, the anima mundi, pervading the universe, the electric vivifier of all 
things. Light is the great Protean magician, and' under the divine will of the 
architect,"* or rather, the architects, the " Builders " (called One collectively), 
its multifarious, omnipotent waves gave birth to every form as well as to every 
living being. From its swelling electric bosom, spring matter and spirit. Within 
its beams lie the beginnings of all physical and chemical action, and of all 
cosmic and spiritual phenomena; it vitalizes and disorganizes; it gives life 
and produces death, and from its primordial point gradually emerged into exist- 
ence the myriads of worlds, visible and invisible celestial bodies. It was at the 
ray of this First mother, one in three, that " God," according to Plato, " lighted 

893. The Elementml Vortket inaugtirated a personal and anthropomorphic God. This 
by the Mind have not been improved by ia not my idea. Kabalistically speaking, the 
their modem transformation. " Architect " is the generic name for the 

Sephiroth, the Builders of the Universe, as 

894. I have been often taken to task for the '* Universal Mind " represents the ooUeo- 
tisinf expressions in Isis denoting belief in tivky of the Dhy&n Chohanic Minds. 



580 tHE SEC&^ DOCTRINE 

a fire which we now call the sun,""" and which is not the cause of either light 
or heat, but merely the focus, or, as we might say, the lens, by which the rays 
of the primordial light become materialized, are concentrated upon our Solar 
System, and produce all the correlations of forces. 

This is the Ether, as just explained in the views of Metcalfe, re- 
peated by Dr. Richardson, save the submission of the former to some 
details of the modem tmdulatory theory. We do not say that we deny 
the theory, but assert only that it needs completion and re-arrangement. 
But the Occultists are by no means the only heretics in this respect; 
for Mr. Robert Htmt, F. r. s., remarks*^ tiiat: — 

. . . the undulatory theory does not accotmt for the results of his experiments. 
Sir David Brewster, in his Treatise on Optics, showing ''that the cokmra 
of vegetable life arise . . . from a specific attraction which the particles of 
these bodies exercise over the differently-colored rays of li^t," and that "it is 
by the light of the sun that the colored juices of plants are elaborated, that the 
colors of bodies are changed, etc. . . ." remarks that it is not easy to allow 
" that such effects can be produced by the mere vibration of an ethereal medium." 
And he is forced, he sasrs, "by this class of izcts, to reason as if light was 
material" [?]. Professor Josiah P. Cooke, of Harvard University, szys that 
he "cannot agree . . . with those who regard the wave-theory of light as an 
established principle of Sdence."*^ Herschel's doctrine, that the intensity of 
light, in effect of each tmdulation, "is inversely as the square of the distance 
from the luminous body," if correct, damages a good deal, if it does not kill 
the undulatory theory. That he is right, was proved repeatedly by experiments 
with photometers; and though it begins to be much doubted, the ondolatoffy 
theory is still alive."* 

To this remark of Sir W. Brewster — " forced to reason as if light 
was material " — there is a good deal to reply. Light, in one sense, is 
certainly as material as electricity itself is. And if electricity is not 
material, if it is only "a mode of motion," how is it that it can be 
stored up in Faure's accumulators? Helmholtz says that electricity 
must be as atomic as matter ; and Mr. W. Crookes, F.R.S., supported 
the view in his address to the Chemical Section of the British Associa- 
tion, of which he was President (at Birmin^iam, 1886). This is what 
Helmholtz says:"* 

If we accept the hypothesis that the elementary substances are comp oae d 
of atoms, we cannot avoid concluding that electricity also, positive as well as 
negative, is divided into definite elementary portions, which behave like atoois 
of electricity. 

Here we have to repeat that which was already said in Section IX : 



89S. Timmoi. S97. Modern Chtmitiry. 

996. In hit J?#JMrcA«i m Ughi im Us 898. Tm UwpsUedr U 137. 

Ck€mt4c9l RtUHons, 899. Purmd^ LtUwru, I88I. 



A CHASE AFTER THE PRIMAI^ MATTER 581 

there is but one science that can henceforth direct modem research into 
the one path which will lead to the discovery of the whole, hitherto 
occult, truth, and it is the youngest of all — chemistry, as it now stands 
reformed. There is no other, not excluding astronomy, that can so 
unerringly guide scientific intuition, as chemistry can. Two proofs of 
it are to be found in the world of Science — two great chemists, each 
among the greatest in his own country, and these are Mr. Crookes and 
the late Professor Butlerof : one, a thorough believer in abnormal phe- 
nomena; the other, as fervid a Spiritualist as he was great in natural 
Sciences. It becomes evident that while pondering over the ultimate 
divisibility of matter, and in the hitherto fruitless chase after the 
element of negative atomic weight, the scientifically trained mind of 
the chemist must feel irresistibly drawn towards those ever-shrouded 
worlds, to the mysterious beyond, whose measureless depths seem to 
close against the approach of the too materialistic hand that would fain 
draw aside its veil. " It is the unknown and the ever unknowable/' 
warns the Monist- Agnostic. Not so ; answers the persevering chemist : 
— " We are on the track and are not daunted, and fain would we enter 
the mysterious region which ignorance tickets unknown*' ^^ 

A few lines at the very close of his lecture on the Genesis of the 
Elements - — two or three sentences — showed the eminent Scientist to 
be on the royal road to the greatest discoveries. He has been over- 
shadowing for some time " the original protyle," and came to the con- 
clusion that " he who grasps the Key will be permitted to unlock some 
of the deepest mysteries of creation." The protyle, as that great 
chemist explains: — 

... is a word analogous to protoplasm, to express the idea of the orig^inal 
primal matter existing before the evolution of the chemical elements. The 
word I have ventured to use for this purpose is compounded of ^P^ (earlier 
than) and ^i| (the stuflf of which things are made). The word is scarcely a 
new coinage, for 600 years ago Roger Bacon wrote in his Arte Chymiae, "The 
elements are made out of ^^ and every element is converted into the nature of 
another element 

The Knowledge of Roger Bacon did not come to this wonderful old 
magician*^* by inspiration, but because he studied ancient works on 

900. Mr. Crookei^ " PresidentUI Address** mind, whkh is a comscstion of the undif- 

St Binningfasin. fercntisblc Integral.'* — (Pracfieal Lessons 

"There is but one unknown — #A# utU- on ths Occult,) 

wuUs substratum of Spint [Space]. That 901. Thus, what the writer of the present 

which is not the Absoluts and the 0ns is, work said ten years ago in " Isis UnvsUsd" 

in Tirtue of that Tery differentiation, how- (I, p. 64) was prophetic, is seems. These are 

erer far remored from the physical senses, the words: " Many of these mystics, hy fol* 

•hvayt a^cessihk to the ^>iritual httmaQ lowing what they were taught by some tret- 



580 tHE SEC&^ DOCTRINE 

a fire which we now call the sun,""" and which is not the cause of either light 
or heat, but merely the focus, or, as we might say, the lens, by which the rays 
of the primordial light become materialized, are concentrated upon our Solar 
System, and produce all the correlations of forces. 

This is the Ether, as just explained in the views of Metcalfe, re- 
peated by Dr. Richardson, save the submission of the former to some 
details of the modem tmdulatory theory. We do not say that we deny 
the theory, but assert only that it needs completion and re-arrangement. 
But the Occultists are by no means the only heretics in this respect; 
for Mr. Robert Hunt, F. r. s., remarks ••• tiiat: — 

... the undulatory theory does not accotmt for the results of his experim ents. 
Sir David Brewster, in his Treatise on Optics, showing "that the cxAoan 
of vegetable life arise . . . from a specific attraction which the particles of 
these bodies exercise over the differently-colored rays of light," and that "it is 
by the light of the sun that the colored juices of plants are elaborated, that the 
colors of bodies are changed, etc. . . ." remarks that it is not easy to allow 
" that such effects can be produced by the mere vibration of an ethereal mediooL* 
And he is forced, he sa3rs, "by this class of facts, to reason as if light was 
material" [?]. Professor Josiah P. Cooke, of Harvard University, sajrs that 
he "cannot agree . . . with those who regard the wave-theory of tight as an 
established principle of Science." "^ Herschel's doctrine, that the intensity of 
light, in effect of each undulation, "is inversely as the square of the distancr 
from the luminous body," if correct, damages a good deal, if it does not kill 
the undulatory theory. That he is right, was proved repeatedly by experiments 
with photometers; and though it begins to be much doubted, the ondolatory 
theory is still alive."* 

To this remark of Sir W. Brewster — " forced to reason as if light 
was material " — there is a good deal to reply. Light, in one sense, is 
certainly as material as electricity itself is. And if electricity is not 
material, if it is only "a mode of motion," how is it that it can be 
stored up in Faure's accumulators? Helmholtz says that electricity 
must be as atomic as matter ; and Mr. W. Crookes, F.R.S., supported 
the view in his address to the Chemical Section of tiie British Associa- 
tion, of which he was President (at Birmin^iam, 1886). This is what 
Helmholtz says:"* 

If we accept the hypothesis that the elementary substances are composed 
of atoms, we cannot avoid concluding that electricity also, positive as well as 
negative, is divided into definite elementary portions, which behave like atoois 
of electricity. 

Here we have to repeat that which was already said in Section IX : 

895. Timoiat. 897. Modtm Clu m i thj , 

89«. In hit R€Mmrek0* •% Ugki im Us 898. " liit UnvftUd." U 137. 

Ckswticml RtlsH^ns, 899. Fmmd^y Ltctmrts, 188L 



AI.I.-POTENTIAL UNITY 583 

as a dual Force by Metcalfe, is never, in fact, and cannot be energy 
alone; for it is the substance of the world, its soul, the dUpermeant 
" Sarvaga," in conjunction with Kola " time." The three are the trin- 
ity in one, during Manvantara, the all-potential Unity, which acts on 
the plane of illusion (Maya) as three distinct things. In Orphic philo- 
sophy in Greece they were called Phanes, Chaos, and Chronos — the 
triad of the Occult philosophers of that period. 

But see how closely Mr. Crookes brushes by the " Unknowable," and 
what "potentialities" there are for the acceptance of Occult truths in 
his discoveries. He continues, speaking of the evolution of atoms : — 

. . . Let us pause at the end of the first complete vibration and examine 
the result We have already found the elements of water, ammonia, carbonic 
add, the atmosphere, plant and animal life, phosphorus for the brain, salt for 
the seas, clay for the solid earth . . . phosphates and silicates sufficient for a 
world and inhabitants not so very different from what we enjoy at the present 
day. True the human inhabitants would have to live in a state of more than 
Arcadian simplicity, and the absence of calcic phosphate would be awkward as 
far as the bone is concerned.*^. . . At the lower end of our curve ... we sec 
a great hiatus. . . . This oasis, and the blanks which precede and follow it, 
may be referred with much probability to the particular way in which our Earth 
developed into a member of our solar system. If this be so, it may be that on 
our Earth only these blanks occur, and not generally throughout the universe. 

This justifies several assertions in the Occult works. 

Firstly, " that neither stars nor the sun can be said to be constituted 
of those terrestrial elements with which the chemist is familiar, though 
they are all present in the sun's outward robes — and a host more of 
elements so far tmknown to science." 

Secondly, that our globe has its own special laboratory on the far- 
away outskirts of its atmosphere, crossing which, every atom and 
molecule change and differentiate from their primordial nature. 

And Thirdly, that though no element present on our earth could ever 
be possibly found wanting in the sun, there are many others which have 
either not reached, or not as yet been discovered on, our globe. " Some 
may be missing in certain stars and heavenly bodies in the process of 
formation; or, though present in them, these elements, on accotmt of 
their present state, may not respond as yet to the usual scientific 
tests." ••• Mr. Crookes speaks of an element of still lower atomic 
weight than hydrogen, an element purely hypothetical as far as our 
earth is concerned . . . though existing in abundance in the chromo- 

904. It it just the existence of fuch worlds invisible worlds, peopled as our own, besides 

in otber planes of consciousness that is the populations of Dhjr&n Chohans. 
claimed by the Occultist The secret science 

teaches that the primitive race was boneless 90S. Piv§ Year^ of Th^osophy, p. 258 ff 

(See Book II); and that there are (to uf) ssq^ 



582 



THB SECRET DOCTRINE 



magic and alchemy, having a key to the real meaning of words. But 
see what Mr. Crookes says of protyle, next neighbor to the unconscious 
Mulaprakriti of the Occultists: — 

. . . Let us start at the moment when the first element came into existence. 
Before this time» matter, as we know it, was not It is equally inq>ossible 
to conceive of matter without energy, as of energy without matter; from 
one point of view both are convertible terms. Before the birth of atoms, all 
those forms of energy, which become evident when matter acts upon matter, 
could not have existed"" — they were locked up in the protyle as latent potenti- 
alities only. Coincident with the creation of atoms, all those attributes and 
properties, which form the means of discriminating one chemical element from 
another, start into existence fully endowed with energy."* 

With every respect due to the great knowledge of the lecturer, the 
Occultists would put it otherwise. They would say that no atom is 
ever " created," for the atoms are eternal within the bosom of the One 
Atom — "the atom of atoms'* — viewed during Manvantara as the 
Jagad-Yoni, the material causative womb of the world. Pradh&na (tin- 
modified matter), that which is the first form of Prakriti, or material 
visible, as well as invisible nature, and Purusha, spirit, are eternally one ; 
and they are Nirup&dhi, (without adventitious qualities or attributes) 
only during Pralaya, and when beyond any of the planes of conscious- 
ness of existence. The atom, as known to modem science, is inseparable 
from Purusha, which is spirit, but is now called " Energy " in Science. 
The protyle atom has not been comminuted or subtilized : it has simply 
passed into that plane, which is no plane, but the eternal state of every- 
thing beyond the planes of illusion. Both Purusha and Pradhana arc 
immutable and unconsumable, or Aparin&min and Avyayo, in eternity ; 
and both during the Mayavic periods may be referred to as Vyaya 
and Parin&min, or that which can expand, pass away and disappear, 
and is " modifiable." In this sense Purusha, must of course, be held 
distinct in our conceptions from Parabrahmam. Nevertheless that, 
which is called "energy" or " force " in Science and has been explained 



titet, tecretly preaenred from one generation 
to another, aehitvtd discovtrUs which would 
not be despised even in our modem days of 
exact sciences. Roger Bacon, the friar, waa 
laughed at aa a quack, and it now generally 
numbered among 'pretenders' to magic art; 
but hit diacoveriet were nerertheleaa accept- 
ed, and are now uaed by thoae who ridicule 
him the mott. Roger Bacon belonged by 
right, if not by fact, to that Brotherhood 
which indttdet all thoae who atudy the occult 
adencet. Living in the thirteenth century, 
almott a contemporary, therefore, of AIbertu« 



Magnus and Thomaa Aquinas, his 

— such as gunpowder and optical 

and hia mechanical achierementa — 

aidered by everyone as so many miradeft. 

He waa accused of having made a 

with the Evil One." 

902. Just so; "those forms of 
. . . which become evident ..." la tkc 
laboratory of the chemist and the phyaksat; 
but there are other forms of energy w c<fck < l 
to other forms of matter, mtkich 
sensuous, yet known to the adepts 

90X Presidential Address, p. Itfw 



AI.I.-POTENTIAL UNITY 583 

as a dual Force by Metcalfe, is never, in fact, and cannot be energy 
alone; for it is the substance of the world, its soul, the cUl-permeant 
" Sarvaga," in conjunction with Kala " time." The three are the trin- 
ity in one, during Manvantara, the all-potential Unity, which acts on 
the plane of illusion (Maya) as three distinct things. In Orphic philo- 
sophy in Greece they were called Phanes, Chaos, and Chronos — the 
triad of the Occult philosophers of that period. 

But see how closely Mr. Crookes brushes by the " Unknowable," and 
what "potentialities" there are for the acceptance of Occult truths in 
his discoveries. He continues, speaking of the evolution of atoms : — 

. . . Let us pause at the end of the first complete vibration and examine 
the result We have already found the elements of water, ammonia, carbonic 
add, the atmosphere, plant and animal life, phosphorus for the brain, salt for 
the seas, clay for the solid earth . . . phosphates and silicates suflBdent for a 
world and inhabitants not so very different from what we enjoy at the present 
day. True the human inhabitants would have to live in a state of more than 
Arcadian simplicity, and the absence of calcic phosphate would be awkward as 
far as the bone is concerned.*^. . . At the lower end of our curve ... we sec 
a great hiatus. . . . This oasis, and the blanks which precede and follow it, 
may be referred with much probability to the particular way in which our Earth 
devdoped into a member of our solar system. If this be so, it may be that on 
our Earth only these blanks occur, and not generally throughout the universe. 

This justifies several assertions in the Occult works. 

Firstly, " that neither stars nor the sun can be said to be constituted 
of those terrestrial elements with which the chemist is familiar, though 
they are all present in the sun's outward robes — and a host more of 
elements so far unknown to science." 

Secondly, that our globe has its own special laboratory on the far- 
away outskirts of its atmosphere, crossing which, every atom and 
molecule change and differentiate from their primordial nature. 

And Thirdly, that though no element present on our earth could ever 
be possibly found wanting in the sun, there are many others which have 
either not reached, or not as yet been discovered on, our globe. " Some 
may be missing in certain stars and heavenly bodies in the process of 
formation; or, though present in them, these elements, on account of 
their present state, may not respond as yet to the usual scientific 
tests." •^ Mr. Crookes speaks of an element of still lower atomic 
weight than hydrogen, an element purely hypothetical as far as our 
earth is concerned . . . though existing in abundance in the chromo- 

904. It it jost the existenoe of tnch worlds invisible worlds, peopled as oar own, besides 

in other plsnes of conscioasness thst is the populations of Dhy&n Chohans. 
clsimed by the Occaltist The secret science 

teadies thst the primitiTe rsoe was bontUu 905. Pwt Years of Th40sophy, p. 258 t$ 

(Sec Book II); and that there are (to us) <'^« 



584 



THE SECRET DOCTRINE 



Sphere of the Sun — the helium. Occult Science adds that not one of 
the elements regarded by chemistry as such really deserves the name. 

Again we find Mr. Crookes speaking with approbation of " Dr. 
Carnelly's weighty argument in favor of the compound nature of the 
so-called elements, from their analogy to the compound radicles ! " 
Hitherto, alchemy alone succeeded within the historical periods, and in 
the so-called civilized countries, in obtaining a real element, or a par- 
ticle of homogeneous matter, the Mysterium Magnum of Paracelsus. 
But then it was before Lord Bacon's day.*®* 

. . . Let us now turn to the upper portion of the scheme. With hydrogen 
of atomic weight = 1, there is little room for other elements, save, perhaps, for 
hypothetical Helium, But what if we get " through the looking-glass," and cross 
the zero line in search of new principles — what shall we find on the other side 
of zero? Dr. Camelly asks for an element of negative atomic weight; here b 
ample room and verge enough for a shadow series of such unsubstantialities. 
Helmholtz says that electricity is probably as atomic as matter; is electricity 
one of the negative elements, and the luminiferous ether another? Matter, as 
we now know it, does not here exist; the forms of energy which are apparent 
in the motions of matter are as yet only latent possibilities. A substance of 
negative weight is not inconceivable.^ But can we form a clear conception of 
a body which combines with other bodies in proportions expressible by negative 
qualities ? "" 

A genesis of the elements such as is here sketched out would not be confined 
to our little solar system, but would probably follow the same general sequence 
of events in every center of energy now visible as a star. 

Before the birth of atoms to gravitate towards one another, no pressure 
could be exercised; but at the outskirts of the fire-mist sphere, within which all 
is protyle — at the shell on which the tremendous forces involved in the birth of 
a chemical element exert full sway — the fierce heat would be accompanied by 
gravitation sufficient to keep the newly-born elements from flying off into space. 
As temperature increases, expansion and molecular motion increase, molecules 
tend to fly asunder, and their chemical affinities become deadened; but the 
enormous pressure of the gravitation of the mass of atomic matter, outside what 
I may for brevity call the birth-shell, would counteract the action of heat 



906. Sayi Mr. Crookes in the same ad- 
dress: " The first riddle which we encounter 
in chemistry is: ' What are the elements? ' 
Of the attempts hitherto made to define or 
explain an element, none satisfy the demands 
of the human intellect The text books tell 
us that an element is ' a body which has not 
been decomposed'; that it is 'a something 
to which we can add, but from which we 
can take nothing,' or ' a body which increases 
in weight with every chemical change/ Such 
definitions are doubly unsatisfactory: diey 
are provisional, and may cease tomorrow 
po be applicable in any given ci^se. Tbe7 



take their stand, not on any attribute of 
the things to be defined, but on the limita- 
ions of human power: tiiey are confessions 
of intellectual impotence." 

907. And the lecturer quotes Sir George 
Airy, who says (in Faraday's Life and Let- 
ters, VoL II, p. 354) : " I can easily conceive 
that there are plenty of bodies about us not 
subject to this intermutual action, and there- 
fore not subject to the law of gravitation.*' 

908. The Vedintic philosophy conceives 
of such: but then it is not physics, but meta- 
physics, called by Mr. Tyndall "poetr^ an(| 
" fiction,' 



>f 



THE ''seventh" in chemistry 



585 



B^3rond the birth-shell would be a space in which no chemical action could 
take place, owing to the temperature there being above what is called the dis- 
sociation-point for compounds. In this space the lion and the lamb would lie 
down together; phosphorus and oxygen would mix without union; hydrogen 
and chlorine would show no tendency to closer bond^; and even fluorine, that 
energetic gas which chemists have only isolated within the last month or two, 
would float about free and tmcombined. 

Outside this space of free atomic matter would be another shell, in which 
the formed chemical elements would have cooled down to the combination 
point, and the sequence of events so graphically described by Mr. Mattieu 
Williams in " The Fuel of the Sun " would now take place, culminating in the 
solid earth and the commencement of geological time.*" 

This is, in a strictly scientific, but beautiful language, the description 
of the evolution of the differentiated Universe in the secret teachings. 
The learned gentleman closes his address in words, every sentence of 
which is like a flash of light from beyond the dark veil of materiality, 
hitherto thrown upon the exact sciences, and a step forward towards 
the Sanctum Sanctorum of the Occult.*^® Thus he says : — 

We have glanced at the difficulty of defining an element; we have noticed, 
too, the revolt of many leading physicists and chemists against the ordinary 
acceptation of the term element; we have weighed the improbability of their 
eternal existence,*" or their origination by chance. As a remaining alternative, we 
have suggested their origin by a process of evolution like that of the heavenly 
bodies according to Laplace, and the plants and animals of our globe according 
to Lamarck, Darwin, and Wallace."* In the general array of the elements, as 
known to us, we have seen a striking approximation to that of the organic 
world."* In lack of direct evidence of the decomposition of any element, we 
have sought and found indirect evidence. . . . We have next glanced at 
the view of the genesis of the elements ; and lastly we have reviewed a scheme 
of their origin suggested by Professor Reynolds' method of illustrating the 
periodic classification.*". . . Summing up all the above considerations we can- 



909. Pftge 19. 

9ia V%d€ Part in» i XT, " Godt. Monads, 
and Atoma." 

911. In die form they are now, we oon- 
oeiTe? 

912. And to Kapila and Mann — especial- 
ly and originally. 

913. Here is a scientific corroboration of 
the eternal law of correspondences and anal- 
ogy. 

914. This method of illnstrating the peri- 
odic law in the classification of elements is, 
in the words of Mr. Crookes, proposed by Pro- 
fessor Emerson Reynolds, of Dublin Univers- 
ity, who . . . "points out that in each period, 
^ general properties of the elements vary 



from one to another, with approximate regu- 
larity until we reach the seventh member, 
which is in more or less striking contrast 
with the first element of the same period, 
as well as with the first of the next Thus 
chlorine, the seventh member of Mendeleefs 
third period, contrasts sharply with both so- 
dium, the first member of the same series, 
and with potassium, the first member of the 
next series; whilst on the other hand, so- 
dium and potassium are closely analogous. 
The six elements, whose atomic weights in- 
tervene between sodium and potassium, vary 
in properties, step by step, until chlorine, 
the contrast to sodium, is reached. But from 
chlorine to potassium, the analogue of so- 
dium, there Is a change in properties per 



586 



THE SECRET DOCTRINE 



not, indeed, venture to assert positively that our so-called elements have been 
evolved from one primordial matter; but we may contend that the balance of 
evidence, I think, fairly weighs in favor of this speculation. 

Thus inductive Science, in its Branches of Astronomy, Physics, and 
Chemistry, while advancing timidly towards the conquest of Nature's 
secrets in her final effects on our terrestrial plane, recedes to the days 
of Anaxagoras and the Chaldees in its discoveries of (a) the origin 
of our phenomenal world, and (b) the modes of formation of the 
bodies that compose the universe. And having to turn back for their 
cosmogonical hypotheses to the beliefs of the earliest philosophers, and 
the systems of the latter — systems that were all based on the teachings 
of a universal secret doctrine with regard to the primeval matter with 
its properties, functions, and laws, — have we not the right to hope that 
the day is not far off when Science will show a better appreciation of 
the wisdom of the ancients than it has hitherto done? 

No doubt Occult philosophy could learn a good deal from exact 



talHtm, ... If we Urns recognise a con- 
trast in properties — more or less decided — 
between the first and the last members of 
each series, we can scarcely help admitting 
the existence of a point of mean yariation 
within each system. In general the fourth 
element of each series possesses the property 
we mig^t expect a transition-element to ex- 
hibit. . . . Thus for the purpose of graphic 
translation. Professor Reynolds considers 
that the fourth member of a period — silicon, 
for example — may be placed at the apex of 
a symmetrical curve, which shall represent 
for that particular period, the direction in 
which the properties of the series of elements 
yary with rising atomic weights." 

Now, the writer humbly confesses complete 
ignorance of modem chemistry and its mys- 
teries. But she is pretty well acquainted 
with the Occult doctrine with regard to cor- 
respondences of types and antitypes in na- 
ture, and perfect analogy as a fundamental 
law in Occultism. Hence she ventures a 
remark which will strike every Occultist, 
however it may be derided by orthodox 
Science. This method of illustrating the 
periodic law in the behavior of elements, 
whether or not still a hypothesis in chem- 
istry, is a law in Occult Sciences, Every 
well-read Occultist knows that the seventh 
and fourth members — whether in a septen- 
ary chain of worlds, the septenary hierarchy 
of angels, or in the constitution of man, ani- 
mal, plant, or mineral atom — that the sev- 
enth and fourth members, we say, in tbt 
geometrically and mathematicallj unifonn 



workings of the immutable laws of Nature, 
always play a distinct and specific part in 
the septenary system. From the stars twink- 
ling high in heaven, to the q>arks flying 
asunder from the rude fire built by the sav- 
age in his forest; from the hierarchies and 
the essential constitution of the Dhyan Cho- 
hans — organized for diviner apprehensions 
and a loftier range of perception than tiie 
greatest Western psychologist ever dreamed 
of, down to Nature's classification of wpedea 
among the humblest insects; finally from 
worlds to atoms, everjrthing in the universe, 
from great to small, proceeds in its qtiritual 
and physical evolution, cyclically and sep- 
tennially, showing its seventh and fourth 
number (the latter the turning point) behav- 
ing in the same way as shown in that period- 
ic law of atoms. Nature never proceeds 
per saltum. Therefore, when Mr. Crookes 
remarks to this that he does not " wish to 
infer that the gaps in Mendeleef s table, and 
in this graphic representation of it (the dia- 
gram showing the evolution of atoms) neces- 
sarily mean that there are elements actu- 
ally existing to fill up the gaps; these gaps 
may only mean that at the birth of the ele- 
ments, there was an easy potentiality of the 
formation of an element which would fit into 
the place " — an Occultist would respectfully 
remark to him that the latter hypothesis 
can only hold good, if the septenary arrange- 
ment of atoms is not interfered with. This 
is the one law, and an infallible method 
that must always lead to success, one wh^ 
follows it. 



PURANAS VERSUS ROYAI* SOCIETY 587 

modem science ; but the latter, on the other hand, might profit by an- 
cient learning in more than one way, and chiefly in Cosmogony. For 
instance, the mystical signification, alchemical and transcendental, of 
the many imponderable substances that fill interplanetary space, and 
which, interpenetrating each, are the direct cause, at the lower end, of 
the production of natural phenomena manifesting through Tnbratton 
(so-called). The knowledge of the real (not the hypothetical) nature 
of Ether, or rather of the Akaia, and other mysteries, in short, can 
alone lead to the knowledge of Forces. It is that substance against 
which the materialistic school of the physicists rebels with such fury, 
especially in France,'^' and which exact Science has to advocate not- 
withstanding. They cannot make away with it without incurring the 
risk, like a modem Samson, of pulling down the pillars of the Temple 
of Science, and getting buried under its roof. 

The theories built upon the rejection of Force outside and indepen- 
dent of Matter pure and simple, have been all shown fallacious. They 
do not, and cannot, cover the ground, and many of the scientific data 
are thus proved unscientific, " Ether produced Sound " is said in the 
Puranas, and the statement is laughed at. It is the vibrations in the 
air, we are corrected. And what is air? Could it exist if there were 
no etheric medium in Space to buoy up its molecules? The case 
stands simply thus. Materialism cannot admit the existence of any- 
thing outside matter, because with the acceptance of an imponderable 
Force — the source and head of all the physical Forces — other intel- 
ligent Forces would have to be admitted virtually, and that would lead 
Science very far. For it would have to accept as a sequel the pre- 
sence in Man of a still more spiritual power — entirely independent, 
for once, of any kind of matter physicists know anything about. 
Hence, apart from a hypothetical ether of Space and gross physical 
bodies, the whole Sidereal and unseen Space is, in the sight of the 
materialists, one boundless void in nature — blind, unintelligent, useless. 

And now the next question is : What is that Cosmic Substance, and 
how far can one go to suspect its nature or to wrench from it its se- 
crets, and thus feel justified in giving it a name? How far, especially, 
has modem Science gone in the direction of those secrets, and what 
it is doing to solve them. The latest hobby of Science, the " Nebular 
Theory," may afford us some answer to this question. Let us then 
examine the credentials of the Nebular Theory. 

915. A group of electridant has jutt pro- which had the honor of being introduced to 

tested against the new theory of Clausius, Professor Clausius in 1881, and whose war- 

the famous professor of the University of cry (cri de ralliement) \b A has tBihtr" 

Bonn. The character of the protest is shown — down with ether, even; they want Uni- 

in the signature, which has "Jules Bourdin, versal Void, you seel 
in the name of the group of Electricians. 



588 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 



XIII 

SCIENTIFIC AND ESOTERIC EVIDENCE FOR, AND 
OBJECTIONS TO, THE MODERN NEBULAR THEORY 

Of late Esoteric Cosmogony has been frequently opposed by the 
phantom of this theory and its ensuing hypotheses. " Can this most 
scientific teaching be denied by your adepts ? " it is asked. " Not en- 
tirely," is the reply, " but the admissions of the men of Science them- 
selves kill it; and there remains nothing for the adepts to deny." 

To make of Science an integral whole necessitates, indeed, the study 
of spiritual and psychic, as well as physical Nature. Otherwise it will 
ever be like the anatomy of man, (Uscussed of old by the profane 
from the point of view of his shell-side and in ignorance of the inter- 
ior work. Even Plato, the greatest philosopher of his cotmtry, became 
guilty, before his initiation, of such statements as that liquids pass into 
the stomach through the lungs. Without metaphysics, as Mr. H. J. 
Slack says, real science is inadmissible. 

The nebulae exist ; yet the nebular theory is wrong. A nebula exists 
in a state of entire elemental dissociation. It is gaseous and — some- 
thing else besides, which can hardly be connected with gases, as known 
to physical science; and it is self-luminous. But that is all. The 
sixty-two "coincidences" enumerated by Professor Stephen Alexan- 
der,'** confirming the nebular theory, may all be explained by esoteric 
science; though, as this is not an astronomical work, the refutations 
are not attempted at present. Laplace and Faye come nearer to the 
correct theory than any; but of the speculations of Laplace there re- 
mains little in the present theory except its general features. Never- 
theless, "there is in Laplace's theory," says John Stuart Mill, "no- 
thing hypothetical; it is an example of legitimate reasoning from 
present effect to its past cause; it assimies nothing more than that 
objects which really exist, obey the laws which are known to be obeyed 
by all terrestrial objects resembling them."**^ 

This, from such an eminent logician as Mill was, would be valuable, 
if it could only be proved that " terrestrial objects resembling . . . " 
celestial objects at such a distance as the nebulae are — resemble those 
objects in reality, not alone in appearance. 

Another of the fallacies from the Occult stand-point, which arc 
embodied in the modem theory as it now stands, is the h3rpothesis that 
the planets were all detached from the Sun ; that they are botie of his 

916. Smiituonian ConfribuHons, XXI, Art i, pp. 79-97, 
917. Sytifm 0f Logic, p. 229, 



«« «^ «4 . « ^^ A * M ^^.r*.^*. ^^ it 



SO ^AR SHALT THOU GO . . . " S89 

bone and flesh of his flesh; whereas, the Sun and planets are only 
co-uterine brothers, having had the same nebular origin, only in a 
different mode from that postulated by modem astronomy. 

The many objections raised against the homogeneity of original dif- 
fuse matter, on the ground of the uniformity in the composition of the 
fixed stars, by some opponents of the modern nebular theory, do not 
affect the question of that homogeneity at all, but only the said theory. 
Our solar nebula may not be completely homogeneous, or, rather, it 
may fail to reveal itself as such to the astronomers, and yet be de facto 
homogeneous. The stars do differ in their constituent materials and 
even exhibit elements quite unknown on earth ; nevertheless, this does 
not affect the point that primeval matter — *. e., as it appeared even in 
its first differentiation from its laya condition'" . — is yet to this day 
homogeneous, at immense distances, in the depths of infinitude, and 
likewise at points not far removed from the outskirts of our solar 
system. 

Finally, there does not exist one single fact brought forward by the 
learned objectors against the "nebular theory" (false as it is, and 
hence, illogically enough, fatal to the hypothesis of the homogeneity of 
matter), that can withstand criticism. One error leads into another. 
A false premiss will naturally lead to a false conclusion, although an 
inadmissible inference does not necessarily affect the validity of the 
major proposition of the syllogism. Thus, one may leave every side- 
issue and inference from the evidence of spectra, and lines, as simply 
provisional for the present, and abandon all matters of detail to phys- 
ical science. The duty of the Occultist lies with the Soul and Spirit of 
Cosmic Space, not merely with its illusive appearance and behavior. 
That of official physical science is to analyse and study its shell — the 
Ultima Thule of the Universe and man, in the opinion of Materialism. 

With the latter, Occultism has nought to do. It is only with the 
theories of such men of learning as Kepler, Kant, Oersted, and Sir W. 
Herschel, who believed in a Spiritual world, that Occult Cosmogony 
might treat, and attempt a satisfactory compromise. But the views of 
those physicists differed vastly from the latest modem speculations. 
Kant and Herschel had in their mind's eye speculations upon the origin 
and the final destiny, as well as the present aspect, of the Universe, 
from a far more philosophical and psychic standpoint ; whereas modern 
Cosmology and Astronomy now repudiate anything like research into 
the mysteries of being. The result is what might be expected: com- 
plete failure and inextricable contradictions in the thousand and one var- 
ieties of so-called scientific theories, and in this theory as in all others. 

918. Beyond the cero*line of action. 



580 'I'HE SECR^ DOCTRINE 

a fire which we now call the sun," *" and which is not the cause of either light 
or heat, but merely the focus, or, as we might say, the lens, by which the rayi 
of the primordial light become materialized, are concentrated upon our Solar 
System, and produce all the correlations of forces. 

This is the Ether, as just explained in the views of Metcalfe, re- 
peated by Dr. Richardson, save the submission of the former to some 
detaib of the modem undulatory theory. We do not say that we deny 
the theory, but assert only that it needs completion and re-arrangement. 
But the Occultists are by no means the only heretics in this respect; 
for Mr. Robert Htmt, F. r. s., remarks ••• that : — 

... the undulatory theory does not account for the results of his experiments. 
Sir David Brewster, in his Treatise on Optics, showing "that the cdoars 
of vegetable life arise . . . from a specific attraction which the particles of 
these bodies exercise over the differently-colored rays of light,** and that "it it 
by the light of the sun that the colored juices of plants are elaborated, that the 
colors of bodies are changed, etc . . ." remarks that it is not easy to alknr 
" that such effects can be produced by the mere vibration of an ethereal medium." 
And he b forced, he says, "by this class of facts, to reason as if lig^t was 
material" [?]. Professor Josiah P. Cooke, of Harvard University, says that 
he "cannot agree . . . with those who regard the wave-theory of light as aa 
established principle of Science.'"^ Herschel's doctrine, that the intensity of 
light, in effect of each undulation, "is inversely as the square of the distance 
from the luminous body," if correct, damages a good deal, if it does not kill 
the undulatory theory. That he is right, was proved repeatedly by e3q>eriments 
with photometers; and though it begins to be much doubted, the ondalatory 
theory is still alive."* 

To this remark of Sir W. Brewster — " forced to reason as if light 
was material " — there is a good deal to reply. Lig^t, in one sense, is 
certainly as material as electricity itself is. And if electricity is not 
material, if it is only ''a mode of motion," how is it that it can be 
stored up in Faure's accumulators? Helmholtz says that electridtj 
must be as atomic as matter ; and Mr. W. Crookes, F.R.S., supported 
the view in his address to the Chemical Section of the British Associa- 
tion, of which he was President (at Birming^iam, 1886). This is what 
Helmholtz says:"* 

If we accept the hypothesis that the elementary substances are c omp osed 
of atoms, we cannot avoid concluding that electricity also, positive as weQ as 
negative, b divided into definite elementary portions, which behave like atoms 
of electricity. 

Here we have to repeat that which was already said in Section IX : 



895. Timoios. 897. Modem Cktmittry. 

896. In hia Rtsmrehes on Ughi im Um 898. " Isii UwvtUedr h 1S7. 
CluwUc0l ReUOont, 899. PwrmAaj L^cimrti, 18S1. 



A CHASE A^TER THE PRIMAI^ MATTER 



581 



there is but one science that can henceforth direct modem research into 
the one path which will lead to the discovery of the whole, hitherto 
occult, truth, and it is the youngest of all — chemistry, as it now stands 
reformed. There is no other, not excluding astronomy, that can so 
unerringly guide scientific intuition, as chemistry can. Two proofs of 
it are to be found in the world of Science — two great chemists, each 
among the greatest in his own country, and these are Mr. Crookes and 
the late Professor Butlerof : one, a thorough believer in abnormal phe- 
nomena ; the other, as fervid a Spiritualist as he was great in natural 
Sciences. It becomes evident that while pondering over the ultimate 
divisibility of matter, and in the hitherto fruitless chase after the 
element of negative atomic weight, the scientifically trained mind of 
the chemist must feel irresistibly drawn towards those ever-shrouded 
worlds, to the mysterious beyond, whose measureless depths seem to 
close against the approach of the too materialistic hand that would fain 
draw aside its veil. " It is the unknown and the ever unknowable/' 
warns the Monist- Agnostic. Not so ; answers the persevering chemist : 
— " We are on the track and are not daunted, and fain would we enter 
the mysterious region which ignorance tickets unknown/'*^ 

A few lines at the very close of his lecture on the Genesis of the 
Elements < — two or three sentences — showed the eminent Scientist to 
be on the royal road to the greatest discoveries. He has been over- 
shadowing for some time " the original protyle/' and came to the con- 
clusion that " he who grasps the Key will be permitted to unlock some 
of the deepest mysteries of creation." The protyle, as that great 
chemist explains: — 

... is a word analogous to protoplasm, to express the idea of the original 
primal matter existing before the evolution of the chemical elements. The 
word I have ventured to use for this purpose is compounded of ^/^ (earlier 
than) and ^if (the stuff of which things are made). The word is scarcely a 
new coinage, for 600 years ago Roger Bacon wrote in his Arte Chymiae, " The 
elements are made out of ^^ and every element is converted into the nature of 
another element. 

The Knowledge of Roger Bacon did not come to this wonderful old 
magician*^* by inspiration, but because he studied ancient works on 



900. Mr. Crookefl* " Preddential Address** 
St Birminglisin. 

"There is but one unknown — th4 ulH- 
mait subsfratum of Spirit [Spsce]. That 
which is not the Absolutt and the Ont is, 
in Tirtne of thst very di£ferentiation, how- 
ever fmr removed from the physical senses, 
ahrays accessihie to the ^ritual human 



mind, which is a coruscation of the undif- 
ferentiable Integral.** — (Praeiical Ltssons 
on th4 OecuU,) 

901. Thus, what the writer of the present 
work said ten years ago in ** Isit UnvMgd" 
(I, p. 64) was prophetic is seems. These are 
the words: " Many of these mystics, hj fol- 
lowing what they were taught by some tret- 



592 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

ing upon the immediate cosmological problems presented for solution, 
he can only be said to have thrown back the mystery a little further. 
To the eternal query — " Whence matter itself ; whence the evolution- 
ary impetus determining its cyclic aggregations and dissolutions; 
whence the exquisite symmetry and order into which the primeval 
atoms arrange and group themselves?" — no answer is attempted by 
Laplace. All we are confronted with, is a sketch of the probable broad 
principles on which the actual process is assimied to be based. Well, 
and what is this now celebrated note on the said process? What has 
he given so wonderfully new and original, that its g^und-work, at any 
rate, should have served as a basis for the modem nebular theory? 
This is what one gathers from various astronomical works. 

Laplace thought that, consequent on the condensation of the atoms 
of the primeval nebula, according to the " Law " of gravity, the now 
gaseous, or perhaps, partially liquid mass, acquired a rotatory motioo. 
As the velocity of this rotation increased, it assimied the form of a thin 
disc ; finally, the centrifugal force overpowering that of cohesion, huge 
rings were detached from the edge of the whirling incandescent masses, 
contracting necessarily by gravitation (as accepted) into spheroidal 
bodies, which would necessarily still continue to preserve the same 
orbit occupied previously by the outer zone from which they were 
separated. ("Laplace conceived that the external and internal zones 
of the ring would rotate with the same angular velocity, which would 
be the case with a solid ring; but the principle of equal areas requires 
the inner zones to rotate more rapidly than the outer.") •*• The ve- 
locity of the outer edge of each nascent planet, he said, exceeding that 
of the inner, there results a rotation on its axis. The more dense bodies 
would be thrown off last ; and finally, during the preliminary state of 
their formation, the newly-segregated orbs in their turn throw off one 
or more satellites. ... In formulating the history of the rupture and 
planetation of rings, Laplace says : 

Almost always each ring of vapors must have broken up into nnmcrons 
masses, which, moving with a nearly uniform velocity, must have continued to 
circulate at the same distance around the Sun. These masses must have taken 
a spheroidal form with a motion of rotation in the same direction as their 
olution, since the inner molecules (those nearer to the Sun) would have 
actual velocity than the exterior ones. They must then have formed as many 
planets in a state of vapor. But, if one of them was sufficiently power fu l to 
unite successively, by its attraction, all the others around its center, the ring of 
vapors must have been thus transformed into a single spheroidal mass of 
vapors circulating around the Sun with a rotation in the same directkn as its 

935. World-Lift, Profetaor WincbcU points to a good many mittalKS of Laplace fa kk 
work; bat at a geohgiti he is not JnfalliWe himaelf in his ' 



UNANSWERABI^E QUERIES 593 

revolution. The latter case has been the more common, but the solar system 
presents us the first case, in the four small planets which move between Jupiter 
and Mars. 

While few will be found to deny " the magnificent audacity of this 
hypothesis," it is impossible not to recognize the insurmountable diffi- 
culties with which it is attended. Why, for instance, do we find that 
the satellites of Neptune and Uranus display a retrograde motion; 
that, in spite of its closer proximity to the Sun, Venus is less dense 
than the Earth? Similarly, the more distant Uranus is more dense 
than Saturn? How is it that so many variations in the inclination of 
their axes and orbits are present in the supposed progeny of the central 
orb ; that such startling variations in the size of the planets is notice- 
able; that the Satellites of Jupiter are more dense by .288 than their 
primary; that the phenomena of meteoric and cometic systems still 
remain unaccounted for? To quote the words of a Master: 

They [the Occultists] find that the centrifugal theory of Western birth is 
unable to cover all the ground. That, unaided, it can neither account for every 
oblate spheroid, nor explain away such evident difficulties as are presented by 
the relative density of some planets. How, indeed, can any calculation of cen- 
trifugal force explain to us,, for instance, why Mercury, whose rotation is, we 
are told, only about one-third that of the Earth, and its density only about one- 
fourth greater than the Earth, should have a polar compression more than ten 
times as great as the latter^ And again, why Jupiter, whose equatorial rotation 
b said to be "twenty-seven times greater, and its density only about one-fifth 
that of the earth" should have its polar compression seventeen times greater 
than that of the earth? Or why Saturn, with an equatorial velocity fifty-five 
times greater than Mercury for centripetal force to contend with, should have 
its polar compression only three times greater than Mercury's? To crown the 
above contradictions, we are asked to believe in the Central Forces, as taught 
by Modern Science, even when told that the equatorial matter of the Sun, 
with more than four times the centrifugal velocity of the Earth's equatorial 
surface, and only about one-fourth part of the gravitation of the equatorial 
matter, has not manifested any tendency to bulge at the Solar equator, nor 
shown the least flattening of the poles of the Solar axis. In other and clearer 
words, the Sun, with only one-fourth of our Earth's density for the centrifugal 
force to work upon, has no polar compression at all! We find this objection 
made by more than one astronomer, yet never explained away satisfactorily 
so far as the "Adepts" are aware. 

Therefore, do they [the Adepts] say, that the great men of science of the 
West, knowing . . . next to nothing either about cometary matter, centrifugal 
and centripetal forces, the nature of the nebulae, or the physical constitution 
of the Sun, the Stars, or even the Moon, are imprudent to speak as confidently 
as they do about the " central mass of the Sun " whirling out into space planets, 
comets, and what not . . . We maintain that it [the Sun] evolves out only the 



594 ^HE SECRET DOCTRINE 

/i/^-principle, the Soul of those bodies, giving and receiving it back, in our 
solar system, as the "Universal Life-Giver" ... in infinitude and Etcmitj; 
that the solar system is as much the microcosm of the one Macrocosm as man 
is the former when compared with his own little Solar Cosmos."* 

The essential faculty possessed by all the cosmic and terrestrial ele- 
ments, of generating within themselves a regular and harmonious series 
of results, a concatenation of causes and effects, is an irrefutable proof 
that they are either animated by an extra or intra intelucence, or 
conceal such within or behind the tfuinifested veil. Occultism does not 
deny the certainty of the mechanical origin of the Universe; it only 
claims the absolute necessity of mechanicians of some sort behind those 
Elements (or within) — a dogma with us. It is not the fortuitous 
assistance of the atoms of Lucretius, who himself knew better, that 
built the Kosmos and all in it Nature herself contradicts such a the- 
ory. Celestial space, containing matter so attenuated as is Ether, can- 
not be called on, with or without attraction, to explain the common 
motion of the sidereal hosts. Although the perfect accord of their 
mutual revolution indicates clearly the presence of a mechanical cause 
in Nature, Newton, who of all men had best right to trust to his deduc- 
tions and views, was nevertheless forced to abandon the idea of ever 
explaining, by the laws of known Nature and its Material forces, the 
original impulse given to the millions of orbs. He recognized fully 
the limits that separate the action of natural Forces from that of the 
Inteli^igences that set the immutable laws into order and action. 
And if a Newton had to renounce such hope, which of the modem 
materialistic pigmies has the right of sa)ring: "I know better"? 

To become complete and comprehensible, a cosmogonical theory has 
to start with a primordial Substance diffused throughout boundless 
Space, of an intellectual and divine Nature. That substance must be 
the Soul and Spirit, the S)mthesis and Seventh Principle of tiic mani- 
fested Kosmos, and, to serve as a spiritual Up&dhi to this, there must 
be the sixth, its vehicle — primordial physical matter, so to speak, 
though its nature must escape forever our limited normal senses. It 
is easy for an astronomer, if endowed with an imaginative faculty, to 
build a theory of the emergence of the universe out of chaos, by simplj 
appl3ring to it the principles of mechanics. But such a tmiverse will 
always prove, with respect to its scientific human creator, a Franken- 
stein's monster ; it will lead him into endless perplexities. The applica- 
tion of the mechanical laws only can never carry the speculator beyond 
the objective world ; nor will it unveil to men the origin and final des- 
tiny of Kosmos. This is whither the nebular theory has led Science. 

926. Pivt Yfors of Thtcsophy, pp. 249-250; " Do the Adepts deny the Nebular TWacy?" 



WHAT ARE THE NEBULAE? 595 

In sober fact and truth this theory is twin sister to that of Ether, and 
both are the oflFsprings of necessity; one as indispensable to account 
for the transmission of light, as the other to explain the problem of the 
origin of the solar systems. The question with them is, how the same 
homogeneous matter'^^ could, obeying the laws of Newton, give birth 
to bodies — sun, planets, and their satellites — subject to conditions of 
identity of motion and formed of such heterogeneous elements. 

Has the nebular theory helped to solve the problem, even if applied 
solely to bodies considered as inanimate and material? We say most 
decidedly not. What progress has it made since 1811, when Sir W. 
Herschel's paper, first presenting facts based on observation and show- 
ing the existence of nebular matter, made the " Sons " of the Royal 
Society " shout for joy "? Since then a still greater discovery has per- 
mitted, through spectrimi analysis, the verification and corroboration 
of Sir W. Herschel's conjecture. Laplace demanded some kind of 
primitive " world-stuflf " to prove the idea of progressive world-evolu- 
tion and growth. Here it is, as offered two millenniums ago. 

The " world-stuff," now nebulae, was known from the highest anti- 
quity. Anaxagoras taught that, having differentiated, the subsequent 
commixture of heterogeneous substances remained motionless and un- 
organized, until finally "the Mind" — the collective body of Dhyan 
Chohans, we say — began to work upon and communicated to it motion 
and order.'^" The theory is now taken up in its first portion, that of 
any " Mind " interfering with it being rejected. Spectrum analysis 
reveals the existence of nebulae formed entirely of gases and luminous 
vapors. Is this the primitive nebular matter? The spectra reveal, it 
is said, the physical conditions of the matter which emits cosmic light. 
The spectra of the resolvable and the irresolvable nebulae are shown 
to be entirely different, the spectra of the latter showing their physical 
state to be that of glowing gas or vapor. The bright lines of one 
nebula reveal the existence of hydrogen in it, and of other material 
substances known and unknown. The same in the atmospheres of the 
Sun and stars. This leads to the direct inference that a star is formed 
by the condensation of a nebula ; hence that even the metals themselves 
on earth are formed owing to the condensation of hydrogen or some 
other primitive matter, some ancestral cousin to " helium," perhaps, or 

927. Had astronomers held simply, in of the tmiyerse, or the formation of the suns 

their present state of Knowledge, to the and stars from the primitiTe matter, and then 

hypothesis of Laplace, which was simply the the development of the planets around their 

formation of the planetary system, it might sun, rest on quite different facts in nature 

in time have resulted in something like an and are even so viewed hy Science itself, 

approximate truth. But the two parts of They are at the opposite poles of being, 
the general problem, that of the formation 928. Aristotle's Physica, viii, 1. 



596 'f HE SEOtET DOCTRINE 

some yet unknown stuff? This does not clash with the occult teachings. 
And tiiis is the problem that chemistry is trying to solve ; and it must 
succeed sooner or later in the task, accepting nolens volens, when it 
does, the esoteric teaching. But when this does happen, it will kill the 
nebular theory as it now stands. 

Meanwhile Astronomy cannot accept in any way, if it is to be re- 
garded as an exact science, the present theory of tfie filiation of stars 
— even if occultism does so in its own way, as it explains this filiation 
differently — because astronomy has not one single physical datum to 
show for it. Astronomy could anticipate Chemistry in proving the 
existence of the fact, if it could show a planetary nebula exhibiting a 
spectrum of three or four bright lines, gradually condensing and trans- 
forming into a star, with a spectrum all covered with a number of dark 
lines. But, 

the question of the variability of the nebulae, even as to their form, is yet one 
of the mysteries of Astronomy. The data of observation possessed so far are 
of too recent an origin, too uncertain to permit us to affirm anjrthing.*" 

Since the discovery of the spectroscope, its magic power has revealed 
to its adepts only one single transformation of a star of this kind ; and 
even that one showed directly the reverse of what is needed as proof 
in favor of the nebular theory; namely — a star transforming itself 
into a planetary nebula. As told in The Observatory,^*^ the temporary 
star which appeared in the constellation Cygnus, in November, 1876, 
discovered by J. F. J. Schmidt, exhibited a spectrum broken by very 
brilliant lines. Gradually, the continuous spectrum and most of the 
lines disappeared, leaving finally one single brilliant line, which ap- 
peared to coincide with the green line of the nebula. 

Though this metamorphosis is not irreconcilable with the hypothesis 
of the nebular origin of the stars, nevertheless this single solitary case 
rests on no observation whatever, least of all on direct observatioa. 
The occurrence may have been due to several other causes. Since 
astronomers are inclined to think our planets are tending toward 
precipitation on the Sun, why should not that star have blazed out 
o>ying to a collision of such precipitated planets, or, as many suggest, 
the appulse of a comet? Anyhow, the only known instance of a star 
transformation since 1811 is not favorable to the nebular theory. 
Moreover, on the question of this theory, as in all others, astronomers 
disagree. 

In our own age, it was Buffon, before Laplace ever thought of it, 
who, very much struck by the identity of motion in the planets, was 
the first to propose the hypothesis of the planets and their satellites 

929. Cosmogonicai Hypothest* of Wolf, p. 3. 93a Vol. I« p. 18S. 



THE META-^EMENTS OF PHYSICAL SCIENCE 597 

originating in the bosom of the Sun. Forthwith, and for the purpose, 
he invented a special comet, supposed to have torn out, by a power- 
ful oblique blow, the quantity of matter necessary to their formation. 
Laplace gave its dues to the " comet " in his Bxposition du Systime 
du Monde.^*^ But the idea was seized and even improved upon by 
a conception of the alternate evolution from the Sun's central mass of 
planets apparently without weight or influence on the motion of the 
visible planets — and as evidently without any more existence than 
the likeness of Moses in the moon. 

But the modem theory is also a variation on the systems elaborated 
by Kant and Laplace. The idea of both was that, at the origin of 
things, all that matter which now enters into the composition of the 
planetary bodies was spread over all the space comprised in the solar 
system — and even beyond. It was a nebula of extremely small den- 
sity, whose condensation gradually gave birth, by a mechanism that 
has hitherto never been explained, to the various bodies of our systems. 
This is the original nebular theory, an incomplete yet faithful repeti- 
tion — a short chapter out of the large volume of universal esoteric 
cosmogony — of the teachings in the Secret Doctrine. And both sys- 
tems, Kant's and Laplace's, diflFer greatly from the modem theory, 
redundant with conflicting ^ufe-theories and fanciful hypotheses. 

The essence of cometary matter and of that which composes the stars is 
totally different from any of the chemical or physical characteristics with which 
Western Science is now acquainted. While the spectroscope has shown the 
probable similarity (owing to the chemical action of terrestrial light upon the 
intercepted rays) of earthly and sidereal substance, the chemical actions, peculiar 
to the variously progressed orbs of space, have not been detected, nor proven 
to be identical with those observed on our own planet — 

say the Teachers.^'* 

Mr. Crookes says almost the same in the fragment quoted from his 
lecture, "Elements and Meta-Elements." 

"At the utmost," observes C. Wolf,"* "could the nebular hypothesis show in 
its favor, with W. Herschel, the existence of planetary nebulae in various 
degrees of condensation, and of spiral nebulae, with nuclei of condensation on 
the branches and center.*" But, in fact, the knowledge of the bond that unites 
the nebulae to the stars is yet denied to us; and lacking as we do direct obser- 
vation, we are even debarred from establishing it even on the analogy of 
chemical composition." 

931. Note VII. of the Obtenratory, PaHs, Cosmogonical Hy- 

potheses, 

932. Five Years of Theosophy, pp. 239, 934. Bat the ipectrm of these nebulae 
241 and 242. have never yet been ascertained. When they 

are found with bright lines, then only may 

933. Member of the Institute, Astronomer tliey be dted. 



598 



THE SECRET DOCTRINE 



It IS evident that, even if the men of science, leaving aside the 
difficulty arising for them out of such undeniable variety and hetero- 
geneity of matter in the constitution of nebulae, did admit, with the 
ancients, that the origin of all the visible and invisible heavenly bodies 
must be sought for in one primordial homogeneous world-stuff, in a 
kind of FRK'protyle,^^^ — it is evident that this would not put an end to 
their perplexities. Unless they admit also that our actual visible Uni- 
verse is merely the Sthula-Sarira, the gross body, of the sevenfold 
Kosmos, they will have to face another problem; especially if they 
risk maintaining that its now visible bodies are the result of the con- 
densation of that one and single primordial matter. For mere observa- 
tion shows them that the actions which produced the actual Universe 
are far more complex than could ever be embraced in that theory. 

First of all, there are two distinct classes of irresolvable nebulae, — 
as Science itself teaches. 

The telescope is unable to distinguish between the two, but the 
spectroscope can, and notices, therefore, an essential difference be- 
tween their physical constitutions.**' " Some of these," Wolf tells us, 

have a spectrum of three or four bright lines, others a continuous spectrum. 
The first are gaseous, the others formed of a pulverulent matter. The former 
must constitute a veritable atmosphere: it is among these that the solar nebula 
of Laplace has to be placed. The latter form an ensemble of particles that may 
be considered as independent, and the rotation of which obeys the laws of 



935. Mr. Croolces' "Protylc" must not 
be regarded as the primary stuff, out of 
which the Dhyftn Chohans, in accordance 
with the immuUble laws of nature, wove our 
solar system. This protyU cannot even be 
the first prima-mattria of Kant, which that 
great mind saw used up in the formation of 
the worlds, and thus existing no longer in a 
diffused state. It is a msdxatk phase in 
the progressive differentiation of cosmic sub- 
stance from its normal undifferentiated state. 
ProtyU is then the aspect assumed by matter 
in its middle passage into full objectivity. 

936. **The question of the resolvability 
of the nebulae has been often presented in 
too affirmative a manner and quite contrary 
to the ideas expressed by the illustrious ex- 
perimenter with the spectra of these constel- 
lations — Mr. Huggins. Every nebula whose 
spectrum contains only bright lines is gas- 
eous, it is said, and hence is irresolvable; 
every nebula with a continuous spectrum 



must end by resolving into stars with an 
instrument of sufficient power. This assump- 
tion is contrary at once to the results ob- 
tained, and to spectroscopic theory. The 
Lyra nebula, the Dumb-bell nebula, the cen- 
tral region of the nebula of Orion, appear 
resolvable, and show a spectrum of bright 
lines; the nebula of Can§s Venatici is not 
resolvable, and gives a continuous qtectrum. 
Because, indeed, the spectroscope informs us 
of the physical state of the constituent matter 
of the stars, but affords us no notions of 
their modes of aggregation. A nebula formed 
of gaseous globes (or even of nuclei, faintly 
luminous, surrounded by a powerful atxnos- 
phere) would give a spectrum of lines and 
be still resolvable; such seems to be the 
state of Huggins* region in the Orion nebula. 
A nebula formed of solid or fluidic particles 
in a state of incandescence, a true dond, 
will give a continuous spectrum but will be 
irresolvable." (C Wolf, Cosmogonieal Hy- 
potheses.) 



THE NEBULAR THEORY A ROMANCE 599 

internal weight: such are the nebulae adopted by Kant and Faye. Observation 
allows us to place the one as the other at the very origin of the planetary 
world. But when we try to go beyond and ascend to the primitive chaos which 
has produced the totality of the heavenly bodies, we have first to account for 
the actual existence of these two classes of nebulae. If the primitive chaos 
were a cold luminous gas^ one could understand how the contraction resulting 
from attraction could have heated it and made it luminous. We have to explain 
the condensation of this gas to the state of incandescent particles, the presence 
of which is revealed to us in certain nebulae by the spectroscope. If the original 
chaos was composed of such particles, how did certain of their portions pass 
into the gaseous state, while others have preserved their primitive condition?... 

Such is the synopsis of the objections and difficulties to the accept- 
ance of the nebular theory brought forward by the French savant, who 
concludes his interesting chapter by declaring that: — 

The first part of the Cosmogonical problem — what is the primitive matter 
of chaos; and how did that matter give birth to the sun and stars? — thus 
remains to this day in thb domain of romance and op mere imagination.** 

If this is the last word of Science upon that subject, whither then 
should one turn in order to learn what the nebular theory is supposed 
to teach? What, in fact, is this theory? What it is, no one seems to 
know for a certainty. What it is not — we learn from the erudite 
author of the World-Life. He tells us that: — 

(I) It " is not a theory of the evolution of the Universe . . . but 
only and primarily a genetic explanation of the phenomfma of the 
solar system, and accessorily a co-ordination of the principal pheno- 
mena in the stellar and nebular firmament, as far as human vision has 
been able to penetrate/* 

(II) " That it does not regard the Comets as involved in that par- 
ticular evolution which has produced the solar system." (Esoteric 
doctrine does,) 

(It does, because it, too, recognizes the comets as forms of cosmic 
existence co-ordinated with earlier stages of nebular evolution; and it 
actually assigns to them chiefly the formation of all worlds.) 

(III) " That it does not deny an antecedent history of the lumin- 
ous fire mist" — (the secondary stage of evolution in the Secret Doc- 
trine) . . . "and makes no claim to having reached an absolute 

937. See Stanza III about ** Light* or the " Motion is the One Eternal it, and contains 

cold Flame," and Commentary Number 8, the potentialities of every quality in the 

where it is explained that the "mother" Manvantaric Worlds/* it is said. 

(Chaos) is a cold Fire, a cool Radiance, 938. Hypothises Cosmcgoniques, C Wolf, 

eolorleas, formless, devoid of every quality. 1886. 



600 THE SECRET DOCTUNE 

beginning." And even it allows that this " fire mist may have pre- 
viously existed in a cold, non-luminous and invisible condition" . . . 

(IV) And that finally: "It does not profess to discover the 
ORIGIN of things, but only a stadium in material history "... leaving 
"the philosopher and theologian as free as they ever were to seek 
for the origin of the modes of being." ••• 

But this is not all. Even the greatest philosopher of England — Mr. 
Herbert Spencer — arrayed himself against the fantastic theory by 
saying that (a) "The problem of existence is not resolved" by it; 
(&) the nebular h)rpothesis "throws no light upon the origin of dif- 
fused matter," and (c) that " the nebular hypothesis (as it now stands) 
implies a First Cause." •^^ 

The latter, we are afraid, is more than our modem physicists have 
bargained for. Thus, it seems that the poor " hypothesis " can hardly 
expect to find help or corroboration even in the world of the meta- 
physicians. 

Considering all this, the Occultists believe they have a right to pre- 
sent their philosophy, however misunderstood and ostracized it may be 
at present. And they maintain that this failure of the scientists to 
discover the truth is entirely due to their materialism and contempt for 
transcendental sciences. Yet although the scientific minds in our cen- 
tury are as far from the true and correct doctrine of Evolution as ever, 
there may be still some hope left for the future, as we find another 
great scientist giving us a faint glimmer of it. 

In an article in Popular Science Review,^^^ on " Recent Researches 
in Minute Life," we find Mr. H. J. Slack, F. c. s., sec. R. m. s., sajring: 

There is an evident convergence of all sciences, from physics to chemistry 
and physiology, toward some doctrine of evolution and development, of which 
the facts of Darwinism will form part, but what ultimate aspect this doctrine 
will take, there is little, if any, evidence to show, and perhaps it will not be 
shaped by the human mind until metaphysical as well as physical inquiries are 
much more advanced. 

This is a happy forecast indeed. The day may come, then, when the 
" Natural Selection," as taught by Mr. Darwin and Mr. Herbert Spen- 
cer, will form only a part, in its ultimate modification, of our Eastern 
doctrine of Evolution, which will be Manu and Kapila esotericalty 
explained. 

939. World-Lift, p. 196. 
940. IVgjfmimsttr RgvUw, XX, July 27. 1868. 941. VoL XIV, p. 2Si 



HERMES AND KANT 601 

XIV 

FORCES — MODES OF MOTION OR INTELLIGENCES? 

This is, then, the last word of physical science up to the present year, 
1888. Mechanical laws will never be able to prove the homogeneity of 
primeval matter, except inferentially and as a desperate necessity, when 
there will remain no other issue — as in the case of Ether. Modem 
Science is secure only in its own domain and region ; within the phys- 
ical boundaries of our solar system, beyond which everything, every 
particle of matter, is different from the matter it knows : which matter 
exists in states of which Science can form no idea. That matter, which 
is truly homogeneous, is beyond human perceptions, if perception is 
tied down merely to the five senses. We feel its effects through those 
INTELLIGENCES which are the results of its primeval differentiation, 
whom we name Dhyan-Chohans ; called in the Hermetic works the 
" Seven Governors," those to whom Pymander, the " Thought Divine," 
refers as the Building Powers, and whom Asklepios calls the " Supernal 
Gods." That matter — the real primordial substance, the noumenon of 
all the "matter" we know of, — even some of the astronomers have 
been led to believe in, and to despair of the possibility of ever account- 
ing for rotation, gravitation, and the origin of any mechanical physical 
laws — unless these Intelligences be admitted by Science. In the above- 
quoted work upon astronomy, by Wolf,**' the author endorses fully the 
theory of Kant, and the latter, if not in its general aspect, at any rate 
in some of its features, reminds one strongly of certain esoteric teach- 
ings. Here we have the world's system reborn from its ashes, through 
a nebula ; the emanation from the bodies, dead and dissolved in Space 
— resultant of the incandescence of the solar center reanimated by the 
combustible matter of the planets. In this theory, generated and devel- 
oped in the brain of a young man hardly twenty-five years of age, who 
had never left his native place, a small town of Northern Prussia 
(Konigsberg) one can hardly fail to recognize either an inspiring ex- 
ternal power, or the reincarnation which the Occultists see in it. It 
fills a gap which Newton, with all his genius, failed to bridge. And 
surely it is our primeval matter, Akasa, that Kant had in view, when 
proposing to solve Newton's difficulty and his failure to explain, by the 
natural forces, the primitive impulse imparted to the planets, by the 
postulation of a universally pervading primordial substance. For, as 
he remarks in chapter viii, if it is once admitted that the perfect har- 

942. " Lts HTPOTHists Cosmogoniquss. tur fOriging its Mondtt, suivi de la Troduc- 
Bsotntn des TMories Sci^ntifiques modemet Hon de la ThiorU du Citl d» Kant," 



602 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

mony of the stars and planets and the coincidence of their orbital 
planes prove the existence of a natural cause, which would thus be the 
primal cause, " that cause cannot really be the matter which fills today 
the heavenly spaces.'* It must be that which filled space — was space 
— originally, whose motion in differentiated matter was the origin of 
the actual movements of the sidereal bodies ; and which, '' in condens^ 
ing itself in those very bodies, thus abandoned the space that is found 
void today." In other words, it is that same matter of which arc now 
composed the planets, comets, and the Sun himself, which, having in 
the origin formed itself into those bodies, has preserved its inherent 
quality of motion ; which quality, now centered in their nuclei, directs 
all motion. A very slight alteration of words is needed, and a few 
additions, to make of this our Esoteric Doctrine. 

The latter teaches that it is this original, primordial prima materia, 
divine and intelligent, the direct emanation of the Universal Mind — 
the Daiviprakriti (the divine light emanating from the Logo^) — 
which formed the nuclei of all the "self-moving" orbs in Kosmos. It 
is the informing, ever-present moving-power and life-principle, the vital 
soul of the suns, moons, planets, and even of our Earth. The former 
latent : the last one active — the invisible Ruler and guide of the gross 
body attached to, and connected with, its Soul, which is the spiritual 
emanation, after all, of these respective planetary Spirits. 

Another quite occult doctrine is the theory of Kant, that the matter 
of which the inhabitants and the animals of other planets are formed is 
of a lighter and more subtle nature and of a more perfect conformaHon 
in proportion to their distance from the Sun. The latter is too full of 
Vital Electricity, of the physical, life-giving principle. Therefore, the 
men on Mars are more ethereal than we are, while those on Venus 
are more gross, though far more intelligent, if less spiritual. 

The last doctrine is not quite ours — yet those Kantian theories arc 
as metaphysical, and as transcendental as any occult doctrines; and 
more than one man of Science would, if he but dared speak his mind, 
accept them as Wolf does. From this Kantian mind and soul of the 
Suns and Stars to the Mahat (mind) and Prakriti of the Puranas, 
there is but a step. After all, the admission of this by Science would 
be only the admission of a natural cause, whether it would or would 
not stretch its belief to such metaphysical heights. But then Mahat, 
the MIND, is a '* God," and physiology admits *' mind " only as a tem- 
porary function of the material brain, and no more. 

The Satan of Materialism now laughs at all alike, and denies the 
visible as well as the invisible. Seeing in light, heat, electricity, and 
even in the phenomenon of life, only properties inherent in matter, it 

943. Which "Ught" we call Pohai. 



THE VITAI, PRINCIPLE 



603 



laughs whenever life is called Vital Principle, and derides the idea 
of its being independent of and distinct from the organism. 

But here again scientific opinions differ as in ever3rthing else, and 
there are several men of science who accept views very similar to ours. 
Consider, for instance, what Dr. Richardson, F. R. s., (elsewhere quoted 
at length) says of that "Vital Principle," which he calls "nervous 
ether." •** 



I speak only of a veritable material agent, refined, it may be, to the world at 
large, but actual and substantial: an agent having quality of weight and of 
volume, an agent susceptible of chemical combination, and thereby of change 
of physical state and condition, an agent passive in its action, moved always, 
that is to say, by influences apart from itself, ** obeying other influences, an 
agent possessing no initiative power, no vis or energia naturae^ but still playing 
a most important, if not a primary part in the production of the phenomena 
resulting from the action of the energeia upon visible matter.*" 

As Biology and Physiology now deny, in toto, the existence of a 
" vital principle," this extract, together with de Quatrefages' admission, 
is a clear confirmation that there are men of science who take the same 
views about " things occult " as theosophists and occultists do. These 
recognize a distinct vital principle independent of the organism — ma- 
terial, of course, as physical force cannot be divorced from matter, but 
of a substance existing in a state unknown to Science. Life for them 
is something more than the mere interaction of molecules and atoms. 
There is a vital principle without which no molecular combinations 
could ever have resulted in a living organism, least of all in the so- 
called "inorganic" matter of our plane of consciousness. 

By "molecular combinations" is meant, of course, those of the matter 
of our present illusive perceptions, which matter energizes only on 
this, our plane. And this is the chief point at issue.**' 

Thus the Occultists are not alone in their beliefs. Nor are they so 



944. Popular Science Review, VoL X. 

945. This is a mistake, which implies a 
material agent, distinct from the influencea 
which more it, t. «. blind matter and per* 
haps **God" again, whereas this on« Life 
is the Tery God and Gods ** Itself." 

946. The same error. 

947. Page 379. 

948. " Is the Jtva a myth, as science says, 
or is it not? " ask some Theosophists, wa- 
rering between materialistic and idealistic 
Science. The difficulty of really grasping 
eaoterie problems concerning the '* ultimate 
state of matter" is again the old crux of 
the objective and the subjective. What is 



matter? Is the matter of our present objec- 
tive consciousness anything but our sknsa* 
TiONS? True, the sensations we receive 
come from without, but can we really (ex- 
cept in terms of phenomena) speak of the 
"gross matter" of this plane as an entity 
apart from and independent of us? To all 
such arguments Occultism answers: True, in 
reality matter is not independent of, or ex> 
istent outside, our perceptions. Bfan is an 
illusion: granted. But the existence and 
actuality of other, still more illusive, but 
not less actual, entities than we are, is not 
a claim which is lessened, but rather strength* 
ened by this doctrine of VedAntic and even 
Kantian Idealism. 



604 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

foolish, after all, in rejecting even the "gravity" of modem Science 
along with other physical laws, and in accepting instead attraction and 
repulsion. They see, moreover, in these two opposite Forces only the 
two aspects of the universal unit, called " Manifesting Mind"; in 
which aspects. Occultism, through its great Seers, perceives an innum- 
erable Host of operative Beings: Cosmic Dhyan-Chohans, Entities, 
whose essence, in its dual nature, is the Cause of all terrestrial pheno- 
mena. For that essence is co-substantial with the universal Electric 
Ocean, which is Life ; and being dual, as said — positive and negative 
— it is the emanations of that duality that act now on earth under the 
name of "modes of motion"; even Force having now become objec- 
tionable as a word, for fear it should lead someone, even in thought, to 
separate it from matter! It is, as Occultism says, the dual effects of 
that dual essence, which have now been called centripetal and centri- 
fugal forces, negative and positive poles, or polarity, heat and cold, 
light and darkness, etc., etc. 

And it is maintained that even the Greek and Roman Catholic Chris- 
tians, are wiser in believing, as they do — even if blindly connecting 
and tracing them all to an anthropomorphic god — in Angels, Arch- 
angels, Archons, Seraphs, and Morning Stars: in all those theological 
Deliciae humani generis, in short, that rule the cosmic elements, than 
Science is, in disbelieving in them altogether, and advocating its mech- 
anical Forces. For these act very often with more than human intel- 
ligence and pertinency. Nevertheless, that intelligence is denied and 
attributed to blind chance. But, as de Maistre was right in calling 
the law of gravitation merely a word which replaced " the thing un- 
known," •*• so are we right in applying the same remark to all the 
other Forces of Science. And if it is objected that the Count was an 
ardent Roman Catholic, then we may cite Le Couturier, as ardent a 
materialist, who said the same thing, as also did Herschel and many 
others.**^ 

From Gods to men, from Worlds to atoms, from a star to a rush- 
light, from the Sun to the vital heat of the meanest organic being — 
the world of Form and Existence is an immense chain, whose links arc 
all connected. The law of Analogy is the first key to the world- 
problem, and these links have to be studied co-ordinately in their occult 
relations to each other. 

When, therefore, the Secret Doctrine — postulating that conditioned 
or limited space (location) has no real being except in this world of 
illusion, or, in other words, in our perceptive faculties — teaches that 
every one of the higher, as of the lower worlds, is interblended with 
our own objective world; that millions of things and beings arc, in 

949. Sciri*s. 950. Vide Mu4i€ dts ScUncts, Aagiut, 1(56. 



OCCUW AND PHYSICAI, SCIENCES 60S 

point of localization, around and in us> as we are around, with, and in 
them ; it is no metaphysical figure of speech, but a sober fact in Na- 
ture, however incomprehensible to our senses. 

But one has to understand the phraseology of Occultism before criti- 
cising what it asserts. For example, the Doctrine refuses (as Science 
does, in one sense) to use the words " above " and " below," " higher " 
and " lower," in reference to invisible spheres, as being without mean- 
ing. Even the terms " East " and " West " are merely conventional, 
necessary only to aid our human perceptions. For, though the Earth 
has its two fixed points in the poles. North and South, yet both East 
and West are variable relatively to our own position on the Earth's 
surface, and in consequence of its rotation from West to East. Hence, 
when " other worlds " are mentioned — whether better or worse, more 
spiritual or still more material, though both invisible — the Occultist 
does not locate these spheres either outside or inside our Earth, as the 
theologians and the poets do; for their location is nowhere in the 
space known to, and conceived by, the profane. They are, as it were, 
blended with our world — interpenetrating it and interpenetrated by it. 
There are millions and millions of worlds and firmaments visible to us ; 
there are still greater numbers beyond those visible to the telescopes, 
and many of the latter kind do not belong to our objective sphere of 
existence. Although as invisible as if they were millions of miles 
beyond our solar system, they are yet with us, near us, within our own 
world, as objective and material to their respective inhabitants as ours 
is to us. But, again, the relation of these worlds to ours is not that 
of a series of egg-shaped boxes enclosed one within the other, like the 
toys called Chinese nests; each is entirely under its own special laws 
and conditions, having no direct relation to our sphere. The inhabi- 
tants of these, as already said, may be, for all we know, or feel, passing 
through and around us as if through empty space, their very habitations 
and countries being interblended with ours, though not disturbing our 
vision, because we have not yet the faculties necessary for discerning 
them. Yet by their spiritual sight the Adepts, and even some seers 
and sensitives, are always able to discern, whether in a greater or 
smaller degree, the presence and close proximity to us of Beings per- 
taining to other spheres of life. Those of the (spiritually) higher 
worlds, communicate only with those terrestrial mortals who ascend 
to them, through individual efforts, on to the higher plane they are 
occupying. . . . 

"The sons of Bh&mi (Earth) regard the Sons of Deva-lokas 

( ANGEL-SPHERES) AS THEIR GODS ; AND THE SONS OF LOWER KINGDOMS 

LOOK UP TO THE MEN OF Bhunu, AS TO THEIR devos (gods) ; MEN 

REMAINING UNAWARE OF IT IN tHEiR BLINDNESS. . . . ThEY (men) 



606 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

TREMBLE BEFORE THEM WHILE USING THEM {foT mogicol purposes). 
. . . The first Race of Men were the " Mind-bom sons " of the 
FORMER. They (the pitris and devas) are our progenitors. . . .••* 

"£(}ucated people/' so-called, deride the idea of Sylphs, Salaman- 
ders, Undines, and Gnomes; the men of science regard as an insult 
any mention of such superstitions ; and with a contempt of logic and 
common good sense, that is often the prerogative of '' accepted author- 
ity," they allow those, whom it is their duty to instruct, to labor under 
the absurd impression that in the whole Kosmos, or at any rate in our 
own atmosphere, there are no other conscious, intelligent beings save 
ourselves.*** Any other humanity (composed of distinct human beings) 
than a mankind with two legs, two arms, and a head with man's fea- 
tures on it, would not be called htunan; though the etymology of the 
word would seem to have little to do with the general appearance of 
a creature. Thus, while Science sternly rejects even the possibility of 
there being such (to us, generally) invisible creatures. Society, while 
believing in it all secretly, is made to deride the idea openly. It hails 
with mirth such works as the Count de Gabalis, and fails to under- 
stand that open satire is the securest mask. 

Nevertheless, such invisible worlds do exist Inhabited as thickly as 
our own is, they are scattered throughout apparent Space in immense 
number ; some far more material than our own world, others gradually 
etherealizing until they become formless and are as " Breaths/' That 
our physical eye does not see them, is no reason to disbelieve in them ; 
physicists can see neither their ether, atoms, nor " modes of motion," or 
Forces. Yet they accept and teach them. 

If we find, even in the natural world with which we are acquainted, 
matter affording a partial analogy in the difficult conception of such 
intnsible worlds, there seems little difficulty in recognizing the possibility 
of such a presence. The tail of a comet, which, though attracting our 
attention by virtue of its luminosity, yet does not disturb or impede our 
vision of objects, which we perceive through and beyond it, affords the 
first stepping-stone toward a proof of the same. The tail of a comet 
passes rapidly across our horizon, and we should neither feel it, nor be 
cognizant of its passage, but for the brilliant coruscation, often per- 
ceived only by a few interested in the phenomenon, while everyone else 
remains ignorant of its presence and passage through, or across, a por- 
tion of our globe. This tail may, or may not, be an integral portion of 
the being of the comet, but its tenuity subserves our purpose as an illus- 

951. Bock II of Commtntory on IA# Book rejected or approached with the tnattm. tm*- 
of DZYAN. tioni And yet Me what the crest Mtrooo' 

952. Even the Quettkm of the plurality mer, Camille Plammarioii* aayt ia Ua 
of worlda inhabited by aentient creaturea ia PlnrdUi dot Mondot. 



PLURALITY OF WORLDS 



607 



tration. Indeed, it is no question of superstition, but simply a result of 
transcendental science, and of logic still more, to admit the existence of 
worlds formed of even far more attenuated matter than the tail of a 
comet. By denying such a possibility. Science has played for the last 
century into the hands of neither philosophy nor true religion, but sim- 
ply into those of theology. To be able to dispute the better the plurality 
of even material worlds, a belief thought by many churchmen incom- 
patible with the teachings and doctrines of the Bible,*'* Maxwell had to 
calumniate the memory of Newton, and try to convince his public that 
the principles contained in the Newtonian philosophy are those " which 
lie at the foundation of all atheistical systems." •** 

" Dr. Whewell disputed the plurality of worlds by appeal to scientific 
evidence," writes Professor Winchell.*** And if even the habitability 
of physical worlds, of planets, and distant stars which shine in myriads 
over our heads is so disputed, how little chance is there for the accept- 
ance of invisible worlds within the apparently transparent space of 
our own I 

But, if we can conceive of a world composed (for our senses) of 
matter still more attenuated than the tail of a comet, hence of inhabi- 
tants in it who are as ethereal, in proportion to their globe, as we are 
in comparison with our rocky, hard-crusted earth, no wonder if we do 
not perceive them, nor sense their presence or even existence. Only, 
in what is the idea contrary to science? Cannot men and animals, 
plants and rocks, be supposed to be endowed with quite a diflferent set 
of senses from those we possess? Cannot their organisms be bom, 
developed, and exist, under other laws of being than those that rule our 
little world? Is it absolutely necessary that every corporeal being 
should be clothed in "coats of skin" like those that Adam and Eve were 
provided with in the legend of Genesis? Corporeality, we are told, 
however, by more than one man of science, "may exist under very 
divergent conditions." •*• Do not we know through the discoveries of 



953. NerertheleM, it will be shown on 
the testimony of the Bible kself. and of such 
good Christian theologians as Cardinal Wise- 
man, that this plurality is taught in both the 
Old and the Ngw TistamenU, 

954. Vidi VoL II, Pluraliiy of Worlds. 

955. See Tk4 Plurality of Worlds, 
wherein the list of many men of Science, 
who wrote to prove the theory, is given. 

956. Professor A. Winchell — arguing 
Qpon the plurality of the worlds — makes the 
following remarks: *' It is not at all improb- 
able that substances of a refractory nature 



might be so mixed with other substances, 
known or unknown to us, as to be capable 
of enduring vastly greater vicissitudes of 
heat and cold than is possible with terrestrial 
organisms. The tissues of terrestrial ani- 
mals are simply suited to terrestrial 
conditions. Yet even here we find different 
types and species of animals adapted to the 
trials of extremely dissimilar situations. . . . 
That an animal should be a quadruped or a 
biped is something not depending on the 
necessities of organization, or instinct, or 
intelligence. That an animal should possess 
just five senses is not a necessity of perdpi- 



608 



THE SOCKET DOCTRINE 



that very all-denying science that we are surrounded by myriads of 
invisible lives? If these microbes, bacteria and the tutti quanti of the 
infinitesimally small, are invisible to us by virtue of their minuteness, 
cannot there be, at the other pole of it, beings as invisible owing to the 
quality of their texture or matter — to its tenuity, in fact? Conversely, 
as to the effects of cometary matter, have we not another example of a 
half visible form of life and matter? The ray of sunlight entering our 
apartment, reveals in its passage myriads of tiny beings living their 
little life and ceasing to be, independent and heedless of whether they 
are perceived or not by our grosser materiality. And so again, of the 
microbes and bacteria and such-like unseen beings in other elements. 
We passed them by, during those long centuries of dreary ignorance, 
after the lamp of knowledge in the heathen and highly philosophical 
systems had ceased to throw its bright light on the ages of intolerance 
and bigotry during early Christianity; and we would fain pass them 
by again now. 

And yet these lives surrounded us then as they do now. They have 
worked on, obedient to their own laws, and it is only as they were grad- 
ually revealed by Science that we have begun to take cognizance of 
them, as of the effects produced by them. 

How long has it taken the world, as it is now, to become what it is ? 



ent existence. Theie may be animals on the 
earth with neither smell nor taste. There 
may be beings on other worlds, and even on 
this, who possess more numerous senses than 
we. The possibility of this is apparent when 
we consider the high probability that other 
properties and other modes of existence lie 
among the resources of the Kosmos, and 
even of terrestrial matter. There are ani- 
mals which subsist where rational man would 
perish — in the soil, in the river, and the 
sea" . . . [and why not human beings of 
di£Ferent organizations, in such case?] . . . 
" Nor is incorporated rational existence con- 
ditioned on warm bh>od, nor on any tempera- 
ture which does not change the forms of 
matter of which the organisms may be com- 
posed. TTtert may be intelligences corporeal- 
iaed after some concept not involving the 
processes of injection, assimilation, and re- 
production. Such bodies would not require 
daily food and warmth. They might be lost 
in the abysses of the ocean, or laid up on 
a stormy cliff through the tempests of an 
Arctic winter, or plunged in a volcano for 



a hundred years, and yet retain conscious- 
ness and thought It is conoeifvable. Why 
might not psychic natures be enshrined in 
indestructible flint and platinum? These sub- 
stances are no further from the nature of 
intelligence than carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, 
and lime. But, not to carry the thought to 
such an extreme, [?] might not high intelli- 
gences be embodied in frames as indifferent 
to external conditions as the sage of the 
western plains, or the lichens of Labrador, 
the rotifers that remain dried for years, or 
the spores of bacteria which pass living 
through boiling water. . . . These suggestions 
are made simply to remind the reader how 
little can be argued respecting the necessary 
conditions of intelligent, organized existence, 
from the standard of corporeal existence 
found upon the earth. Intelligence is, from 
its nature, as universal and as uniform as 
the laws of the Universe. Bodies are merely 
the local fitting of intelligence to particular 
modifications of universal matter or Force." 
iWorld-Life, or Comparative Geology, pp. 
496-498 et seq,) 



THE GEOtOCY 0I^ ENOCH 6W 

If it can be said of cosmic dust that some of it comes to the present day 
"which had never belonged to the earth before," ^^'' how much more 
logical to believe — as the Occultists do — that through the countless 
ages and millions of years that have rolled away, since that dust aggre- 
gated and formed the globe we live in around its nucleus of intelligent 
primeval substance — many humanities, differing from our present 
mankind, as greatly as the one which will evolve millions of years hence 
will differ from our races, appeared but to disappear from the face of 
the earth, as our own will. Those primitive and far-distant human- 
ities, having, as geologists think, left no tangible relics of themselves, are 
denied. All trace of them is swept away, and therefore they have never 
existed. Yet their relics — a very few of them, truly — are to be 
found, and they have to be discovered by geological research. Though, 
even if they were never to be met with, there is no reason to say that 
no men could have ever lived in those geological times, to which the 
period of their presence on earth is assigned. For their organisms 
needed no warm blood, no atmosphere, no feeding; the author of 
World-Life is right, and it is no such great extreme to believe even 
as we do, that as there may be, on scientific hypotheses, "psychic 
natures enshrined in indestructible flint and platinum " to this day, so 
there were psychic natures enshrined in forms of equally indestructible 
primeval matter — the real forefathers of our fifth race. 

When we speak, therefore, as in Book II, of men who inhabited this 
globe 18,000,000 years back, we have in the mind neither the men of 
our present races, nor the present atmospheric laws, thermal conditions, 
etc. The Earth and mankind, like the Sun, Moon, and planets, have 
all their growth, changes, developments, and gradual evolution in their 
life-periods ; they are bom, become infants, then children, adolescents, 
grown-up bodies, grow old, and finally die. Why should not Mankind 
be also under this universal law ? Says Uriel to Enoch : " Behold, I 
have showed thee all things. Thou seest the Sun, Moon, and those 
which conduct the stars of heaven, which cause all their operations, 
seasons, and arrivals to return. . , . In the days of sinners the years 
shall be shortened . . . everything done on Earth shall be subverted 
. . . the moon shall change its laws "... etc.**' 

The " days of Sinners " meant the days when matter would be in 
its full sway on Earth, and man would have reached the apex of phys- 
ical development in stature and animality. That came to pass during 
the period of the Atlanteans, about the middle point of their Race (the 
4th), which was drowned as prophesied by Uriel. Since then man 
began decreasing in physical stature, strength, and years, as will be 

9S7. World'Lifg. 958. Ch. Ixdx. 



610 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

shown in Book II. But as we are in the mid-point of our sub-race of 
the Fifth Root Race — the acme of materiality in each — therefore the 
animal propensities, though more refined, are not the less developed 
for that: and they are so chiefly in civilized cotmtries. 



XV 
GODS, MONADS, AND ATOMS 

Some years ago we remarked ••• that "the Esoteric Doctrine may 
well be called the * thread-doctrine,' since, like SUtr&tman, in the Ve- 
danta philosophy,**® it passes through and strings together all the an- 
cient philosophical religious systems, and reconciles and explains them 
all." We say now it does more. It not only reconciles the various and 
apparently conflicting systems, but it checks the discoveries of modem 
exact science, and shows some of them to be necessarily correct, since 
they are found corroborated in the ancient records. All this will, no 
doubt, be regarded as terribly impertinent and disrespectful, a veritable 
crime of lise-Science; nevertheless, it is a fact. 

Science is, undeniably, ultra-materialistic in our days ; but it finds, in 
one sense, its justification. Nature behaving in actu ever esoterically, 
and being, as the Kabalists say, in abscondito, can only be judged by 
the profane through her appearance, and that appearance is always de- 
ceitful on the physical plane. On the other hand, the naturalists refuse 
to blend physics with metaphysics, the body with its informing soul 
and spirit, which they prefer ignoring. This is a matter of choice with 
some, while the minority strive very sensibly to enlarge the domain of 
physical science by trespassing on the forbidden grounds of metaphjrs- 
ics, so distasteful to some materialists. These scientists are wise in 
their generation. For all their wonderful discoveries would go for 
nothing, and remain for ever headless bodies, unless they lift the veil 
of matter and strain their eyes to see beyond. Now that they have 
studied nature in the length, breadth, and thickness of her physical 
frame, it is time to remove the skeleton to the second plane and search 
within the unknown depths for the living and real entity, for its sub- 
stance — the noumenon of evanescent matter. 

959. "The Scptenaiy Prindple," art in subtle bodies (or priodplcs. JT^Mt) Is 
Piv€ Y«ar$ of Tkecsopky, p. 197. called " thread-sottl," or SAtHtmm la Vo^ 

960. The Atman or Spirit (the Spiritual dintic philosophy. 
StLV) passinff like a thread through the Ihre 



WHICH 0? TH« TWO IS BUND? 611 

It is only by acting on such lines that some of the truths, now called 
" exploded superstitions," will be discovered to be facts and the relics 
of ancient knowledge and wisdom. 

One of such "degrading" beliefs — in the opinion of the all-den)ring 
sceptic — is found in the idea that Kosmos, besides its objective plane- 
tary inhabitants, its humanities in other inhabited worlds, is full of in- 
visible, intelligent Existences. The so-called Arch-Angels, Angels and 
Spirits, of the West, copies of their protot3rpes, the Dhyan-Chohans, the 
Devas and Pitris, of the East, are no real Beings but fictions. On this 
point Materialistic Science is inexorable. To support its position, it 
upsets its own axiomatic law of uniformity in the laws of nature, that 
of continuity, and all the logical sequence of analogies in the evolution 
of being. The masses of the profane are asked, and made, to believe 
that the accumulated testimony of History, which shows even the Athe- 
ists of old — such as Epicurus and Demokritos — believing in gods, 
was false ; and that philosophers like Socrates and Plato, asserting their 
existence, were mistaken enthusiasts and fools. If we hold our opin- 
ions merely on historical grounds, on the authority of legions of the 
most eminent Sages, Neo-Platonists, Mystics of all the ages, from Pyth- 
agoras down to the eminent Scientists and Professors of the present 
century, who, if they reject "gods," believe in "spirits," shall we con- 
sider such authorities as weak-minded and foolish as any Roman Cath- 
olic peasant, who believes in and prays to his once human Saint, or the 
Archangel, St. Michael? But is there no difference between the belief 
of the peasant and that of the Western heirs to the Rosicrucians and 
Alchemists of the Middle Ages? Is it the Van Helmonts, the Khun- 
raths, the Paracelsuses and Agrippas, from Roger Bacon down to' St. 
Germain, who were all blind enthusiasts, hysteriacs or cheats, or is it 
the handful of modem sceptics — the " leaders of thought " — who are 
struck with the cecity of negation? The latter we opine. It would be 
a miracle indeed, quite an abnormal fact in the realm of probabilities 
and logic, were that handful of negators to be the sole custodians of 
truth, while the million-strong hosts of believers in gods, angels, and 
spirits — in Europe and America alone — ^namely, Greek and Latin Chris- 
tians, Theosophists, Spiritualists, Mystics, etc., etc., should be no better 
than deluded fanatics and hallucinated mediums, and often no higher 
than the victims of deceivers and impostors! However varying in 
their external presentations and dogmas, beliefs in the Hosts of invis- 
ible Intelligences of various grades have all the same foimdation. Truth 
and error are mixed in all. The exact extent, depth, breadth, and length 
of the mysteries of Nature are to be found only in Eastern esoteric 
sciences. So vast and so profound are these that hardly a few, a very 
few of the highest Initiates — those whose very existence is known but 



612 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

to a small number of Adepts — are capable of assimilating the know- 
ledge. Yet it is all there, and one by one facts and processes in Na- 
ture's workshops are permitted to find their way into the exact Sci- 
ences, while mysterious help is given to rare individuals in unraveling 
its arcana. It is at the close of great Cycles, in connexion with racial 
development, that such events generally take place. We are at the very 
close of the cycle of 5000 years of the present Aryan Kaliyuga ; and 
between this time and 1897 there will be a large rent made in the Veil 
of Nature, and materialistic science will receive a death-blow. 

Without throwing any discredit upon time-honored beliefs, in what- 
ever direction, we are forced to draw a marked line between blind 
faith, evolved by theologies, and knowledge due to the independent 
researches of long generations of adepts ; between, in short, faith and 
philosophy. There have been — in all ages — undeniably learned and 
good men who, having been reared in sectarian beliefs, died in their 
crystallized convictions. For Protestants, the garden of Eden is the 
primeval point of departure in the drama of Humanity, and the solemn 
tragedy on the summit of Calvary, the prelude to the hoped-for 
Millennium. For Roman Catholics, Satan is at the foundation of 
Kosmos, Christ in its center, and Antichrist at its apex. For both, 
the Hierarchy of Being begins and ends within the narrow frames 
of their respective theologies: one self-created personal God and an 
Empyrean ringing with the Hallelujas of created angels; the rest, 
false gods, Satan and fiends. 

Theophilosophy proceeds on broader lines. From the very banning 
of Aeons — in time and space in our Round and Globe — the Mysteries 
of Nature (at any rate, those which it is lawful for our races to know) 
were recorded by the pupils of those same now invisible "heavenly 
men," in geometrical figures and symbols. The keys thereto passed 
from one generation of "wise men" to the other. Some of the sym- 
bols, thus passed from the east to the west, were brought therefrom by 
Pythagoras, who was not the inventor of his famous " Triangle." The 
latter figure, along with the plane, cube and circle, are more eloquent 
and scientific descriptions of the order of the evolution of the Universe, 
spiritual and psychic, as well as physical, than volumes of descriptive 
Cosmogonies and revealed " Geneses" The ten points inscribed within 
that " Pythagorean triangle " are worth all the theogonies and angelo- 
logics ever emanated from the theological brain. For he who interprets 
them — on their very face, and in the order given — will find in these 
seventeen points (the seven Mathematical Points hidden) the uninter- 
rupted series of the genealogies from the first Heavenly to terrestrial 
man. And, as they give the order of Beings, so they reveal the order 
in which were evolved the Kosmos, our earth, and die primordial de- 



THK MATHEMATICAL POINT 613 

ments by which the latter was generated. Begotten in the invisible 
Depths, and in the womb of the same " Mother " as its fellow-globes 
— he who will master the mysteries of our Earth, will have mastered 
those of all others. 

Whatever ignorance, pride or fanaticism may suggest to the con- 
trary, Esoteric Cosmology can be shown inseparably connected with 
both philosophy and modern science. The gods of the ancients, the 
monads — from Pythagoras down to Leibnitz — and the atoms of the 
present materialistic school (as borrowed by them from the theories of 
the old Greek Atomists) are only a compound imit, or a graduated 
unity like the human frame, which begins with body and ends with 
spirit. In the occult sciences they can be studied separately, but never 
mastered unless viewed in their mutual correlations during their life- 
cycle, and as a Universal Unity during Pralayas, 

La Pluche shows sincerity, but gives a poor idea of his philosophical 
capacities when declaring his personal views on the Monad or the 
Mathematical Point. He says, 

A point is enough to put all the schools in the world in a combustion. But 
what need has man to know that point, since the creation of such a small being 
is beyond his power? A fortiori, philosophy acts against probability when, 
from that point which absorbs and disconcerts all her meditations, she pre- 
sumes to pass on to the generation of the world. . . . 

Philosophy, however, could never have formed its conception of a 
logical, universal, and absolute Deity if it had no Mathematical Point 
within the Circle to base its speculations upon. It is only the mani- 
fested Point, lost to our senses after its pregenetic appearance in the 
infinitude and incognisability of the Circle, that made a reconciliation 
between philosophy and theology possible — on condition that the latter 
should abandon its crude materialistic dogmas. And it is because it 
has so unwisely rejected the P)rthagorean Monad and geometrical fig- 
ures, that Christian theology has evolved its self -created human and 
personal God, the monstrous Head from whence flow in two streams 
the dogmas of Salvation and Damnation. This is so true that even 
those clergymen who would be philosophers and who were masons, 
have, in their arbitrary interpretations, fathered upon the ancient sages 
the queer idea that " the Monad represented (with them) the throne of 
the Omnipotent Deity, placed in the center of the Empyrean to indicate 
T.G.A.O.T.U." »" — read "the Great Architect of the Universe." A 
curious explanation this, more Masonic than strictly Pythagorean. 

Nor did the "hierogram within a Circle, or equilateral Triangle," 
ever mean " the exemplification of the unity of the divine Essence " ; 

961. Th0 Pythagoreon TriangU, or The Science of Numbers, by the Rer. G. Olirer (p, 36)« 



614 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

for this was exemplified by the plane of the boundless Circle. What it 
really meant was the triune co-equal Nature of the first differentiated 
Substance, or the con'substantiality of the (manifested) Spirit, matter 
and the Universe — their " Son," who proceeds from the Point (the 
real, esoteric Locos) or the Pythagorean Monad. For the Greek Monas 
signifies " Unity " in its primary sense. Those unable to seize the dif- 
ference between the monad — the Universal Unit — and the Monads or 
the manifested Unity, as also between the ever-hidden and the revealed 
Logos or the Word, ought never to meddle in philosophy, let alone the 
Esoteric Sciences. It is needless to remind the educated reader of 
Kant's Thesis to demonstrate his second Antinomy,*** Those who have 
read and understood it will see clearly the line we draw between the 
absolutely Ideal Universe and the invisible though manifested Kosmos. 
Our Gods and Monads are not the Elements of extension itself, but 
only those of the invisible reality which is the basis of the manifested 
Kosmos. Neither esoteric philosophy, nor Kant, nor Leibnitz would 
ever admit that extension can be composed of simple or unextended 
parts. But theologian-philosophers will not grasp this. The Circle and 
the Point, which latter retires into and merges with the former, after 
having emanated the first three points and connected them with lines, 
thus forming the first noumenal basis of the Second Triangle in the 
Manifested World, have ever been an insuperable obstacle to theo- 
logical flights into dogmatic Empyreans. On the authority of this 
Archaic Symbol, a male, personal god, the Creator and Father of all, 
becomes a third-rate emanation, the Sephiroth standing fourth in 
descent, and on the left hand of En-Soph (see the Kabalistic Tree of 
Life). Hence, the Monad is degraded into a Vehicle — a "throne"! 
The Monad — only the emanation and reflection of the Point (Log- 
os) in the phenomenal World — becomes, as the apex of the manifested 
equilateral triangle, the " Father." The left side or line is the Duad, 
the "Mother," regarded as the evil, counteracting principle ; ••• the 
right side represents the Son (" his Mother's husband " in every Cos- 
mogony, as one with the apex) ; at the basic line is the Universal plane 
of productive Nature, unifying on the phenomenal plane Father-Mother- 
Son, as these were unified in the apex, in the supersensuous World.*** 
By mystic transmutation they became the Quaternary — the triangle 
became the Tetraktys. 

962. See Kanfs CriHqut dt la Roiton ments — the officiating priest during tlw mar- 
Purg (Barni's translation, VoL 11, page riage ceremony represents the apex of the 
54). iriangU; the bride its left feminine side 

963. Plutarch, D# Plaeitit PhUosopk- and the bridegroom the right one, while the 
orum, horizontal line is sjmbolixed bj the row of 

964. In the Greek and I^atin churches — witnesses, the bridesmaids and best-men. Bat 
which rcj^ard marriage as one of the sacr^- bebind the priest there i$ the alt^ with i(s 






SPACE, PORCE AND MATTER 615 

This transcendental application of geometry to Cosmic and divine 
theogony — the Alpha and the Omega of mystical conception — became 
dwarfed after Pythagoras by Aristotle. By omitting the Point and the 
Circle, and taking no account of the apex, he reduced the metaphysical 
value of the idea, and thus limited the doctrine of magnitude to a simple 
TRIAD — the line, the surface, and the body. His modern heirs, who 
play at Idealism, have interpreted these three geometrical figures as 
Space, Force, and Matter — " the potencies of an interacting Unity." ••• 
Materialistic Science, perceiving but the basic line of the manifested 
" triangle " — the plane of matter — translates it practically as (Father) - 
Matter, (Mother) -Matter, and (Son) -Matter, and theoretically as 
Matter, Force, and Correlation. 

But to the average physicist, as remarked by a Kabalist, " Space, 
Force, Matter, are, what signs in algebra are to the mathematician, 
merely conventional symbols " ; or " Force as force, and Matter as 
matter, are as absolutely unknowable as is the assumed empty space in 
which they are held to interact." As symbols representing abstractions, 

the physicist bases reasoned hypotheses of the origin of things . . . and sees 
three needs in what he terms creation: (a) a place wherein to create; (b) a 
medimn by which to create; (c) a material from which to create. And in 
giving a logical expression to this hypothesis through the terms space, force, 
matter, he believes he has proved the existence of that which each of these 
represents as he conceives it to be,*^ 

The physicist who regards Space merely as a representation of our 
mind, or extension unrelated to things in it, which Locke defined as 
capable of neither resistance nor motion; the paradoxical materialist, 
who would have a void there, where he can see no matter, would reject 
with the utmost contempt the proposition that " Space is a substantial 
though (apparently) an absolutely unknowable living Entity." ••^ Such 
is, nevertheless, the Kabalistic teaching, and it is that of Archaic philo- 
sophy. Space is the real world, while our world is an artificial one. 
It is the One Unity throughout its infinitude : in its bottomless depths 
as on its illusive surface ; a surface studded with countless phenomenal \ 
Universes, systems and mirage-like worlds. Nevertheless, to the East- 
em Occultist, who is an objective Idealist at the bottom, in the real 
world, which is a Unity of Forces, there is " a connexion of all matter 
in the plenum/* as Leibnitz would say. This is symbolized in the 
Pythagorean Triangle. 

myvleriods oontminmentB and symbolic mean- tine meaning of this STmboliara. 

inar, inside of which no one but the conse- 965. See Von Hartmann's and Herbert 

crated priests ought to enter. In the early Spencer's works. 

dajs of Christianity the marriage ceremony 966. Ntw Aspects of Life, by Htory 

was a mystery and a true symbol. Now, Pratt, M. D. 

however, eren the dmrcbea hare lost the 967. Nsw AspscU, pw 9. 



616 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

It consists of ten points inscribed pyramid-like (from one to the last 
four) within its three lines, and it symbolizes the Universe in the fam- 
ous Pythagorean Dekad. The upper single dot is a Monad, and repre- 
sents a Unit-Point, which is the Unity from whence all proceeds, and 
all is of the same essence with it. While the ten dots within the triangle 
represent the phenomenal world, the three sides of the equilateral 
triangle which enclose the pyramid of dots are the barriers of noumenal 
Matter, or Substance, that separated it from the world of Thought 

Pythagoras considered a point to correspond in proportion to unity; a Hm 
to 2; a superficies to 3; a solid to 4; and he defined a point as a Monad hav- 
ing position, and the beginning of all things; a line was thought to correspond 
with duality, because it was produced by the first motion from indivisible 
nature, and formed the junction of two points. A superficies was compared to 
the number three because it is the first of all causes that are found in figures; 
for a circle, which is the principal of all round figures, comprises a triad, in 
center — space — circumference. But a triangle, which is the first of all recti- 
lineal figures, is included in a ternary, and receives its form according to that 
number; and was considered by the Pythagoreans to be the creator of all sub- 
lunary things. The four points at the base of the Pythagorean triangle cor- 
respond with a solid or cube, which combines the principles of length, breadth, 
and thickness, for no solid can have less than four extreme boundary points."* 

It is argued that ''the human mind cannot conceive an indivisible 
unit short of the annihilation of the idea with its subject." This is an 
error, as the Pythagoreans have proved, and a number of Seers before 
them, although there is a special training for it, and although the pro- 
fane mind can hardly grasp it. But there are such things as meta- 
mathematics and metageometry. Even mathematics pure and simple 
proceed from the Universal to the particular, from the mathematical 
hence indivisible Point, to solid figures. The teaching originated in 
India, and was taught in Europe by Pythagoras, who, throwing a veil 
over the Circle and the Point — which no living man can define except 
as incomprehensible abstractions — laid the origin of the differentiated 
Cosmic matter in the basic or horizontal line of the Triangle. Thus the 
latter became the earliest of geometrical figures. The author of New 
Aspects of Life and of the Kabalistic Mysteries — objects to the ob- 
jectivization, so to speak, of the P)rthagorean conception and use of 
the equilateral triangle, and calls it a misnomer. His argument that a 
solid equilateral body — " one whose base, and each of its sides, form 
equal triangles — must have four co-equal sides or surfaces, while a 
triangular plane will as necessarily possess five," demonstrates on the 
contrary the grandeur of the conception in all its esoteric application to 

968, Pyihagoftan Triangle, p. 19, 



PHANTOMS O^ THE MIND 617 

the idea of the pregenesis, and the genesis of Kosmos. Granted, that 
an ideal triangle, depicted by mathematical imaginary lines " can have 
no sides at all, being simply a phantom of the mind (if sides be imputed 
to which, they must be the sides of the object it constructively repre- 
sents)." But in such case most of the scientific hypotheses are no better 
than " phantoms of the mind " ; they are unverifiable, except on infer- 
ence, and have been adopted merely to answer scientific necessities. 
Furthermore, the ideal triangle — " as the abstract idea of a triangular 
body, and, therefore, as the type of an abstract idea " — accomplished 
and carried out to perfection the double symbolism intended. As an 
emblem applicable to the objective idea, the simple triangle became a 
solid. When repeated in stone on the four cardinal points, it assimied 
the shape of the Pyramid — the symbol of the phenomenal merging into 
the noumenal Universe of thought — at the apex of the four triangles ; 
and, as an " imaginary figure constructed of three mathematical lines," 
it symbolized the subjective spheres — those lines "enclosing a mathe- 
matical space — which is equal to nothing enclosing nothing." Because, 
to the senses and the untrained consciousness of profane and scientist, 
everything beyond the line of differentiated matter — i. e, outside of, 
and beyond the realm of even the most spiritual substance — has to 
remain for ever equal to nothing. It is the Ain-Soph — the No-rniNG. 
Yet these " phantoms of the mind ** are in truth no greater abstrac- 
tions than the abstract ideas in general upon evolution and physical 
development — e. g,, Gravity, Matter, Force, etc. — on which the exact 
sciences are based. Our most eminent chemists and physicists are 
earnestly pursuing the not hopeless attempt of finally tracing to its 
hiding-place the protyle, or the basic line of the Pythagorean triangle. 
The latter is, as said, the grandest conception imaginable, as it symbol- 
izes both the ideal and the visible universes.*** For if "the possible 
unit is only a possibility as an actuality of nature, as an individual of 
any kind," and as every individual natural object is capable of division, 
and by division loses its unity, or ceases to be a unit,^''^ it is so only 
in the realm of exact sciences in a world as deceptive as it is illusive. 
In the realm of the Esoteric sciences the unit divided od infinitum, in- 
stead of losing its unity, approaches with every division the planes of 
the only eternal Reai^ity. The eye of the Seer can follow and behold 
it in all its pregenetic glory. This same idea of the reality of the 
subjective, and the unreality of the objective universes, is found at the 
bottom of the Pythagorean and Platonic teachings — limited to the 

969. In the world of Form, having found faces, the four basic points, and the fifth — 

its expression in the Pyramids, Symbolism the aptx. 
has in them both a triangle and a square, 

with their four co-equal triangles or 9ur- 970. New Aspects of Life, 



618 THK SECRET DOCTRINE 

Elect alone ; for Porphyry, speaking of the Monad and the Duad, says 
that the former only was considered substantial and real, " that most 
simple Being, the cause of all unity and the measure of all things" 

But the Duad, although the origin of Evil, or Matter — thence unreal 
in philosophy — is still Substance during Manvantara, and is often 
called the third monad, in Occultism, and the connecting line as between 
two Points, ... or Numbers which proceeded from that, " which was 
before all Numbers," as expressed by Rabbi Barahiel. And from this 
Duad proceeded all the Scintillas of tihe three upper and the four lower 
worlds or planes — which are in constant interaction and correspond- 
ence. This is a teaching which the Kabala has in common with Eastern 
Occultism. For in the occult philosophy there are the " One Cause " 
and the " Primal Cause," which latter thus becomes, paradoxically, the 
second, as clearly expressed by the author of the " Qabbalah, from the 
philosophical writings of Ibn Gabirol'^ — "in the treatment of the 
Primal cause, two things must be considered, the Primal Cause per se, 
and the relation and connexion of the Primal Cause with the visible 
and unseen universe." Thus he shows the early Hebrews following 
in the steps of the Oriental philosophy — Chaldaean, Persian, Hindu, 
Arabic, etc. Their Primal Cause was designated at first "by the tri- 
adic Shaddai, the (triune) Almighty, subsequently by the Tetragram- 
maton, YHVH, symbol of the Past, Present, and Future," and, let 
us add, of the eternal Is, or the I Am. Moreover, in the Kabala, Ae 
name YHVH (or Jehovah) expresses a He and a She, male and female, 
two in one, or Hokhmah and Binah, and his, or rather their Shekinah 
or synthesizing spirit (grace), which makes again of the Duad a Triad 
This is demonstrated in the Jewish Liturgy for Pentecost, and the 
prayer, "In the name of Unity, of the Holy and Blessed Hu (He), 
and His Shekinah, the Hidden and Concealed Hu, blessed be YHVH 
(the Quaternary) for ever." " Hu is said to be masculine and YAH 
feminine, together they make the nn^f rr***** i. e. one YHVH. One, 
but of a male- female nature. The Shekinah is always considered in 
the Qabbalah as feminine."*^* And so it is considered in the exoteric 
Puranas, for Shekinah is no more than Sakti — the female double or 
lining of any god, in such case. And so it was with the early Christians 
whose Holy Spirit was feminine, as Sophia was with the Gnostics. 
But in the transcendental Chaldaean Kabala or " Book of Numbers,'* 
" Shekinah " is sexless, and the purest abstraction, a State, like Nir- 
vana, not subject or object or anything except an absolute Presence. 

Thus it is only in the anthropomorphized systems (such as the Kabab 
has now greatly become) that Shekinah-Sakti is feminine. As such she 
becomes the Duad of Pythagoras, the two straight lines of the symbol 

971. Pl«e ITS. 



THE MONAD OF UIBNITZ 619 

that can never meet, which therefore form no geometrical figure and 
are the symbol of matter. Out of this Duad, when united in one basic 
line of tfie triangle on the lower plane (the upper Triangle of the 
Sephirothal Tree), emerge the Elohim, or Dei^ in Cosmic Nature, 
with the true Kabalists the lowest designation, translated in the Bible 
" God." •" Out of these issue the Scintillas. 

The Scintillas are the " Souls," and these Souls appear in the three- 
fold form of Monads (units), atoms and gods — according to our 
teaching. "Every atom becomes a visible complex unit (a molecule), 
and once attracted into the sphere of terrestrial activity, the Monadic 
Essence, passing through the mineral, vegetable, and animal kingdoms, 
becomes man." (Esot. Catechism,) Again, " God, Monad, and Atom 
are the correspondences of Spirit, Mind, and Body (Atm&, Manas, and 
St Mia Sarira) in man." In their septenary aggregation they are the 
" Heavenly Man " (see Kabala for the latter term) ; thus, terrestrial 
man is the provisional reflection of the Heavenly. ..." The Monads 
(Jtvas) are the Souls of the Atoms, both are the fabric in which the 
Chohans (Dhyanis, gods) clothe themselves when a form is needed." •'• 

This relates to Cosmic and sub-planetary Monads, not to the Super- 
Cosmic Monas (the Pythagorean Monad) as called, in its S)mthetic 
character, by the Pantheistical Peripatetics. The Monads of the pre- 
sent dissertation are treated from the standpoint of their individuality, 
as atomic Souls, before these atoms descend into pure terrestrial form. 
For this descent into concrete matter marks the medial point of their 
own individual pilgrimage. Here, losing in the mineral kingdom their 
individuality, they begin to ascend through the seven states of terrestrial 
evolution to that point where a correspondence is firmly established 
between the human and Deva (divine) consciousness. At present, 
however, we are not concerned with their terrestrial metamorphoses 
and tribulations, but with their life and behavior in Space, on planes 
wherein the eye of the most intuitional chemist and physicist cannot 
reach them — unless, indeed, he develops in himself highly clairvoyant 
faculties. 

It is well known that Leibnitz came several times very near the 
truth, but defined monadic evolution incorrectly, which is not to be 
wondered at, since he was not an Initiate, nor even a Mystic, only a 

972, See the lame work and fwge. that follows — that we oppote, bat the ciyt- 

Sach recent works at the Qabbalah of Mr. talUatioii of all theae into the highly un- 

laaac Myer and of Mr. S. L. MacGregor P^aoaophical, repulsive, and anthropomorphic 

Mathers, folly Justify our atdtude towards Jehovah, the androgynous and finii, deity 

ih^ Uhn^m^f, ivi^r T* I. «n* fh^ u^^»r^ '***' ^^*** ctcmity, Omnipotence, and omni- 

the JehoTistic Deity. It is not the transcen- ^^^^ ^ claimed. We do not war against 

dental, philosophical, and highly metaphysical ^^ n,,^ R»ai,ity, but the hideous theo- 

sbstraction of the original Kabalistic thought logical Shadow, 

'— Ain-Soph-Sbekinah-Adam-Kadmon, and sH 973. BsoffHc Caitekitm, 



620 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

very intuitional philosopher. Yet no psycho-physicist ever came nearer 
than he has to the esoteric general outline of evolution. This evolution 
— viewed from its several standpoints — i. e. as the universal and the 
individualized Monad; and the chief aspects of the Evolving Energy, 
after differentiation — the purely Spiritual, the Intellectual, the Psychic 
and the Physical — may be thus formulated as an invariable law; a 
descent of Spirit into Matter, equivalent to an ascent in physical evolu- 
tion; a re-ascent from the depths of materiality towards its status 
quo ante, with a corresponding dissipation of concrete form and sub- 
stance up to the Laya state, or what Science calls "the zero-point," 
and beyond. 

These states — once the spirit of Esoteric philosophy is grasped — 
become absolutely necessary from simple logical and analogical consid- 
erations. Physical Science having now ascertained, through its depart- 
ment of Chemistry, the invariable law of this evolution of atoms — from 
their " protylean " state down to that of a physical and then a chemical 
particle (or molecule) — cannot well reject the same as a general law. 
And once it is forced by its enemies — Metaphysics and Psychologjr^^* 
— out of its alleged impregnable strongholds, it will find it more difficult 
than it now appears to refuse room in the Spaces of Space to Planetary 
Spirits (gods), Elementals, and even the Elementary Spooks or Ghosts, 
and others. Already Figuier and Paul d'Assier, two Positivists and 
Materialists, have succumbed before this logical necessity. Other and 
still greater Scientists will follow in that " intellectual Fall." They 
will be driven out of their position not by spiritual, theosophical, or 
any other physical or even mental phenomena, but simply by the enor- 
mous gaps and chasms that open daily and will still be opening before 
them, as one discovery follows the other, until they are finally knocked 
off their feet by the ninth wave of simple common sense. 

Here is an example : Professor W. Crookes' latest discovery of what 
he has named protyle. In the Notes on the Bhagavad Gita, by one of 
the best metaphysicians and Vedantic scholars in India,*" the lecturer, 
referring cautiously to "things occult" in that great Indian esoteric 
work, makes a remark as suggestive as it is strictly correct. He says : 

Into the details of the evolution of the solar system itself it is not necessary 
for me to enter. You may gather some idea as to the way in which the various 
elements start into existence from these thkEE principles into which Mth.A- 

974. L«t not the word "psychologjr" cause conceal the void of final annihilation — even 

the reader to carry his thought by an asso- of consciousness. Here Spiritual psychology 

dation of ideas to modem "Psychologists/* is meant 
so-called, whose idealism is another name for 

uncompromising materialism, and whose pre- 975. T. Subba Kao, see Thgosopkitt lor 

tended Monism is no better than a mask to Feb. 1887, 



THE CHEMISTRY O^ THE FUTURE 



621 



PKAKRin is differentiated [the Pythagorean triangle], by examining the lecture 
delivered by Professor Crookes a short time ago upon the so-called elements 
of modem chemistry. This lecture will give you some idea of the way in which 
these Elements spring from ViJvdnara/" the most objective of these three 
principles, which seems to stand in the place of the protyle mentioned in that 
lecture. Except in a few particulars, this lecture seems to give the outlines of 
the theory of physical evolution on the plane of ViJvanara, and is, so far as 
I know, the nearest approach made by modem investigators TO the risai, occuw 
THEORY on the subject. 

These words will be re-echoed and approved by every Eastern 
Occultist Much from the lectures by Professor Crookes has already 
been quoted in § XII of these Addenda. Since then, there has been 
another lecture delivered, as remarkable as the first one, on the 
" Genesis of the Elements," •^^ and also a third one. Here we have 
almost a corroboration of the teachings of Esoteric philosophy concern- 
ing the mode of primeval evolution. It is, indeed, as near an approach, 
made by a great scholar and specialist in chemistry,*^* to the Secret 
Doctrine, as could be made apart from the application of the monads 
and atoms to the dogmas of pure transcendental metaphysics, and their 
connexion and correlation with " Gods and intelligent Conscious Mon- 
ads." But Chemistry is now on its ascending plane, thanks to one of 
its highest European representatives. It is impossible for it to go back 
to that day when materialism regarded its ,yu6-elements as absolutely 
simple and homogeneous bodies, which it had raised, in its blindness, to 
the rank of elements. The mask has been snatched ofiF by too clever a 
hand for there to be any fear of a new disguise. And after years of 
pseudology, of bastard molecules parading under the name of elements, 
behind and beyond which there could be nought but void, a great 
professor of chemistry asks once more : 

What are these elements, whence do they come, what is their signification? 
. . . These elements perplex us in our researches, baffle us in our speculations, 
and haunt us in our very dreams. They stretch like an unknown sea before us 
— mocking, mystifying, and murmuring strange revelations and possibilities.*" 

Those who are heirs to primeval revelations have taught these 



976. " VUvAnara it not merely the man- 
ifefted objectiye world, but the one physical 
baias (the horizontal line of the triangle) 
from which the whole objectire world starts 
into existence." And this is the Cosmic 
Duad, the androgynous Substance. Beyond 
only, is the true Protyle. 

977. By W. Crookes, v. a. s., v. f. c. s., 
delivered at the Rojral Institution, London, 
on Friday, February 18th, 1887. 



978. How true it is will be fully de- 
monstrated only on that day when his di»> 
covery of radiant matter will have resulted 
in a further elucidation with regard to the 
true source of light, and revolutionized all 
the present speculations. Further familiar- 
ity with the northern streamers oi the aurora 
horealis may help the recognition of this 
truth. 

979. Gtn. of Bltm. p. 1. 



622 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

" possibilities " in every century, but have never found a fair hearing. 
The truths inspired to Kepler, Leibnitz, Gassendi, Swedenborg, etc., 
were ever alloyed with their own speculations in one or another pre- 
determined direction — hence distorted. But now one of the great 
truths has dawned upon an eminent professor of modem exact science, 
and he fearlessly proclaims as a fundamental axiom that Science has 
not made itself acquainted, so far, with real simple elements. For 
Professor Crookes tells his audience: 

If I venture to say that our commonly received elements are not simple and 
primordial, that they have not arisen by chance or have not been created in a 
desultory and mechanical manner, but have been evolved from simpler matters 
— or perhaps, indeed, from one sole kind of matter — I do but give formal 
utterance to an idea which has been, so to speak, for some time ''in the air* 
of science. Chemists, physicists, philosophers of the highest merit, declare cxfUi- 
citly their belief that the seventy (or thereabouts) elements of our text-books 
are not the pillars of Hercules which we must never hope to pass. . . . 
Philosophers in the present as in the past — men who certainly have not w or ked 
in the laboratory — have reached the same riew from another side. 

Thus Mr. Herbert Spencer records his conviction that " the chemical 
atoms are produced from the true or physical atoms by processes of 
evolution tmder conditions which chemistry has not yet been able to 
produce." ..." And the poet has forestalled the philosopher. Mil- 
ton**® makes the archangel Raphael say to Adam, instinct with the 
evolutionary idea, that the Almighty had created 

.... One first matter, all 
Indued with various forms, various degrees 
Of substance." 

Nevertheless, the idea would have remained crystallized " in the air 
of Science," and never have descended into the thick atmosphere of 
materialism and profane mortals for years to come, perhaps, had not 
Professor Crookes bravely and fearlessly reduced it to its simple ele- 
ments, and thus publicly forced it on Scientific notice. "An idea," says 
Hutarch, " is a being incorporeal, which has no subsistence by itself, 
but gives figure and form unto shapeless matter, and becomes the cause 
of the manifestation.'* ••* The revolution produced in old chemistry by 
Avogadro was the first page in the Volume of New Chemistry. Mr. 
Crookes has now turned the second page, and is boldly pointing to what 
may be the Ictst. For once protyle accepted and recognized — as 
invisible Ether was, both being logical cmd scientific necessities — 
Chemistry will have virtually ceased to live: it will reappear in its 
reincarnation as New Alchemy, or Metachemistrv. The discoverer 

980. ParodUt Usi, Book V. 981. D# PImcii. PMIm. 



THE GENESIS O^ ATOMS 623 

of radiant matter will have vindicated in time the Archaic Aryan works 
on Occultism and even the Vedas and Puranas. For what are the 
manifested " Mother/' the " Father-Son-Husband " ( Aditi and Daksha, 
a form of Brahma, as Creators) and the " Son," — the three " First- 
bom " — but simply Hydrogen, Oxygen, and that which in its terres- 
trial manifestation is called nitrogenf Even the exoteric descriptions 
of the " First Bom " triad give all the characteristics of these three 
gases, Priestley, the "discoverer" of Oxygen, or that which was 
known in the highest antiquity! 

Yet all the ancient, medieval, and modem poets and philosophers 
have been anticipated even in the exoteric Hindu books. Descartes' 
plenum of matter, differentiated into particles ; Leibnitz's Ethereal Fluid 
and Kant's " primitive fluid " dissolved into its elements ; Kepler's Solar 
Vortex and Systemic Vortices; in short, from the Elemental Vortices 
inaugurated by the universal mind — through Anaxagoras, down to 
Galileo, Torricelli, and Swedenborg, and after them to the latest specu- 
lations by European mystics — all this is fotmd in the Hindu hymns 
and Mantras to the " Gods, Monads, and Atoms," in their fulness, for 
they are inseparable. In esoteric teachings, the most transcendental 
conceptions of the universe and its mysteries, as the most (seemingly) 
materialistic speculations are found reconciled, because those sciences 
embrace the whole scope of evolution from Spirit to matter. As 
declared by an American Theosophist, "The Monads [of Leibnitz] 
may from one point of view be called force, from another matter. 
To occult Science, force and matter are only two sides of the same 

SUBSTANCE." •" 

Let the reader remember these "Monads" of Leibnitz, every one 
of which is a living mirror of the universe, every monad reflecting 
every other, and compare this view and definition with certain Sanskrit 
stanzas (Slokas) translated by Sir William Jones, in which it is said 
that the creative source of the Divine Mind, ..." Hidden in a veil 
of thick darkness, formed mirrors of the atoms of the world, and cast 
reflection from its own face on every atom. . . ." 

When, therefore. Professor Crookes declares that " If we can show 
how the so-called chemical elements might have been generated we 
shall be able to fill up a formidable gap in our knowledge of the uni- 
verse, . . •" the answer is ready. The theoretical knowledge is contained 
in the esoteric meaning of every Hindu cosmogony in the Puranas; the 
practical demonstration thereof — is in the hands of those who will not 
be recognized in this century, save by the very few. The scientific 
possibilities of various discoveries, that must inexorably lead exact 
Science into the acceptation of Eastern Occult views, which contain 

982. Th4 Path, VoL 1, No. 10. p. 297. 



624 'THE SECSET DOCTRINE 

all the requisite material for the filling of those " gaps," are, so far, at 
the mercy of modem materialism. It is only by working in the direction 
taken by Professor Crookes that there is any hope for the recognition 
of a few, hitherto Occult, truths. 

Meanwhile, one thirsting to have a glimpse at a practical diagram of 
the evolution of primordial matter, which, separating and differentiat- 
ing under the impulse of cyclic law, divides itself into a septenary 
gradation of Substance (from a general view), can do no better than 
examine the plates attached to Mr. Crookes' lecture, Genesis of the 
Elements, and ponder well over some passages of the text. In one 
place*" he says: — 

. . . Our notions of a chemical element have expanded. Hitherto the mole- 
cule has been regarded as an aggregate of two or more atoms, and no accoant 
has been taken of the architectural design on which these atoms have been 
joined. We may consider that the structure of a chemical element is more 
complicated than has hitherto been supposed. Between the molecules we are 
accustomed to deal with in chemical reactions and ultimate atoms as first created, 
come smaller molecules or aggregates of ph3rsical atoms; then sub-molecules 
differ one from the other, according to the position they occupied in the yttrium 
edifice. 

Perhaps this hypothesis can be simplified if we imagine 3rttrium to be repre- 
sented by a five-shilling piece. By chemical fractionation I have divided it into 
five separate shillings, and find that these shillings are not counterparts, bat 
like the carbon atoms in the benzol ring, have the impress of their position, 
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, stamped on them. ... If I throw my shillings into the melting- 
pot or dissolve them chemically, the mint stamp disappears and they all turn 
out to be silver. 

This will be the case with all the atoms and molecules when they 
have separated from their compotmd forms and bodies — when prataya 
sets in. Reverse the case, and imagine the dawn of a new manvantara. 
The pure "silver" of the absorbed material will once more separate 
into SUBSTANCE, which will generate " Divine Essences " whose " prin- 
ciples "••* are the primary elements, the sub-elements, the ph3rsical 
energies and subjective and objective matter; or, as these are epitom- 
ized — GODS, MONADS, and ATOMS. If leaving for one moment the 
metaphysical or transcendental side of the question — dropping out 
of the present consideration the supersensuous and intelligent beings 
and entities believed in by the Kabalists and Christians — we turn to 
the atomical theory of evolution, the occult teachings are still found 
corroborated by exact Science and its confessions, as far, at least, as 
regards the supposed "simple" elements, now suddenly d^^raded into 

983. Page 11. three K#A»r/M — Uie astral, the U ^y dmk nd 

984. Correapondinc on the cosmic acale the physical bodies (of mankind), 
with the Spirit, Soul-mind, Ule, and the diridon is made. 



HERMES OR HUXI«EY? 62S 

poor and distant relatives — not even second cousins to the latter. 
For we are told by Professor Crookes that: — 

Hitherto, it has been considered that if the atomic weight of a metal, deter- 
mined by different observers, setting out from different compounds, was always 
found to be constant . . . then such metal must rightly take rank among the 
simple or elementary bodies. We learn . . . that this is no longer the case. 
Again, we have here wheels within wheels. Gadolinium is not an element but 
a compound . . . We have shown that yttrium is a complex of five or more 
new constituents. And who shall venture to gainsay that each of these 
constituents, if attacked in some different manner, and if the result were sub- 
mitted to a test more delicate and searching than the radiant-matter test, might 
not be still further divisible? Where, then, is the actual ultimate element? As 
we advance it recedes like the tantalizing mirage lakes and groves seen by the 
tired and thirsty traveler in the desert Are we in our quest for truth to be 
thus deluded and balked? The very idea of an element, as something absolutely 
primary and ultimate, seems to be growing less and less distinct."* . . . 

On page 429 of Isis Unveiled, Vol. I, we said that " the mystery of 
first creation, which was ever the despair of Science, is unfathomable 
unless they (the Scientists) accept the doctrine of Hermes. They zvill 
have to follow in the footsteps of the Hermetists'* Our prophecy 
begins to assert itself. 

But between Hermes and Huxley there is a middle course and point 
Let the men of Science only throw a bridge half-way, and think 
seriously over the theories of Leibnitz. We have shown our theories 
with regard to atomic evolution — their last formation into compound 
chemical molecules being produced within our terrestrial workshops in 
the earth's atmosphere and not elsewhere — as strangely agreeing with 
the evolution of atoms shown on Mr. Crookes' plates. Several times 
already it was stated in this volume that Mdrttdnda (the Sim) had 
evolved and aggregated, together with his smaller seven Brothers, from 
his Mother's (Aditi's) bosom, that bosom being prima MATER-ia — the 
lecturer's primordial protyle. Esoteric doctrines teach the existence of 
" an antecedent form of energy having periodic cycles of ebb and swell, 
rest and activity "••• — and behold a great scholar in Science now 
asking the world to accept this as one of the postulates. We have 
shown the " Mother," fiery and hot, becoming gradually cool and radi- 
ant, and that same Scientist claims as his second postulate, a scientific 
necessity, it would seem — " an internal action akin to cooling, operat- 
ing slowly in the protyle." Occult Science teaches that " Mother " lies 
stretched in infinity (during Pralaya) as the great Deep, the "dry 
Waters of Space," according to the quaint expression in the Catechism, 

98S. Page 16. 986. Page 21. 



626 ^HE SECR^ DOCTRINE 

and becomes wet only after the separation and the moving over its face 
of Ndrayana, the " Spirit which is invisible Flame, which never bums, 
but sets on fire all that it touches, and gives it life and generation." ••^ 
And now Science tells us that " the first-bom element . . . most nearly 
allied to protyle "... would be "hydrogen . . . which for some time 
would be the only existing form of matter " in the Universe. What 
says Old Science ? It answers : Just so ; but we would call hydrogen 
and oxygen (which instils the fire of life into the " Mother " by incuba- 
tion) in the pregenetic and even pre-geological ages — the Spirit, the 
noumenon of that which becomes in its grossest form oxygen and hydro- 
gen and nitrogen on Earth — nitrogen being of no divine origin, but 
merely an earth-born cement to unite other gases and fluids, and serve 
as a sponge to carry in itself the breath of Li^E — pure air.**' Before 
these gases and fluids become what they are in our atmosphere, they 
are interstellar Ether ; still earlier and on a deeper plane — something 
else, and so on in infinitum. The eminent and learned gentleman must 
pardon an Occultist for quoting him at such length; but such is the 
penalty of a Fellow of the Royal Society who approaches so near the 
precincts of the Sacred Adytum of Occult mysteries as virtually to 
overstep the forbidden boundaries. 

But it is time to leave modem physical science and turn to the psycho- 
logical and metaphysical side of the question. We would only remark 
that to the " two very reasonable postulates " required by the eminent 
lecturer, " to get a glimpse of some few of the secrets so darkly hidden " 
behind " the door of the Unknown " — a third should be added ••• — 
lest no battering at it should avail ; the postulate that Leibnitz, in his 
speculations, stood on a firm groundwork of fact and truth. The admir- 
able and thoughtful synopsis of these speculations — as given by John 
Theodore Mertz in his " Leibnitz " — shows how nearly he has brushed 
the hidden secrets of esoteric Theogony in his Monadologie. And yet 
that philosopher has hardly risen, in his speculations above the first 
planes, the lower principles of the Cosmic Great Body. His theory 
soars to no loftier heights than those of the manifested life, self-con- 
sciousness and intelligence, leaving the regions of the earlier post- 
genetic mysteries untouched, as his ethereal fluid is post-planetary. 

But this third postulate will hardly be accepted by the modem men 

987. "The Lord It • consuming fir€,** 989. Foremott of all, the postulate that 

In him was lift, and the life was the there is no such thing ki Nature as inorganic 






light of men." substances or bodies. Stones, minerala, rocks 

and even chemical "atoms" are simply or* 
988. Which if separated alcbSmicaxxt ganic units in profound lethargy. Their 
would yield the Spirit of Life, and its coma has an end and their inertia becomes 
Klixir. activity. 



LEIBNITZ AND OCCULTISM 627 

of Science; and, like Descartes, they will prefer keeping to the proper- 
ties of external things, which, like extension, are incapable of explaining 
the phenomenon of motion, rather than accept the latter as an independ- 
ent Force. They will never become anti-Cartesian in this generation ; 
nor will they admit that " this property of inertia is not a purely geo- 
metrical property, that it points to the existence of something in external 
bodies which is not extension merely." This is Liebnitz's idea as 
analysed by Mertz, who adds that he called this something Force, and 
maintained that external things were endowed with Force, and that 
in order to be the bearers of this force they must have a substance, 
for they are not lifeless and inert masses, but the centers and bearers of 
form, a purely esoteric claim, since force was with Leibnitz an active 
principle, the division between mind and matter disappearing by this 
conclusion. But — 

The mathematical and dynamical inquiries of Leibnitz would not have led 
to the same result in the mind of a purely scientific inquirer. But Leibnitz 
was not a scientific man in the modem sense of the word Had he been so, 
he might have worked out the conception of energy, defined mathematically 
the ideas of force and mechanical work, and arrived at the conclusion that 
even for purely scientific purposes it is desirable to look upon force, not as a 
primary quantity, but as a quantity derived from some other value. 

But luckily for truth — 

Leibnitz was a philosopher; and as such he had certain primary principles, 
which biased him in favor of certain conclusions, and his discovery that exter- 
nal things were substances endowed with force, was at once used for the purpose 
of applying these principles. One of these principles was the law of continuity, 
the conviction that all the world was connected, that there were no gaps and 
chasms which could not be bridged over. The contrast of extended thinking 
substances was unbearable to him. The definition of the extended substances 
had already become untenable: it was natural that a similar inquiry was made 
into the definition of mind, the thinking substance. . . . 

The divisions made by Leibnitz, however incomplete and faulty from 
the standpoint of Occultism, show a "spirit of metaphysical intuition to 
which no man of science, not Descartes — not even Kant — has ever 
reached. With him there existed ever an infinite gradation of thought. 
Only a small portion of the contents of our thoughts, he said, rises into 
the clearness of apperception, " into the light of perfect consciousness." 
Many remain in a confused or obscure state, in the state of " percep- 
tions " ; but they are there ; . . . Descartes denied soul to the animal, 
Leibnitz endowed, as the Occultists do, "the whole creation with 



628 'fHE SECRET DOCTRINE 

mental life, this being, according to him, capable of infinite grada- 
tions." And this, as Mertz justly observes, 

at once widened the realm of mental life, destroying the contrast of amimaU 
and inanimate matter; it did yet more — it reacted on the conception of matter, 
of the extended substance. For it became evident that external or material 
things presented the property of extension to our senses only, not to oar think- 
ing faculties. The mathematician, in order to calculate geometrical figures, 
had been obliged to divide them into an infinite number of infinitely small parts, 
and the physicist saw no limit to the divisibility of matter into atoms. The bulk 
through which external things seemed to fill space was a property which they 
had acquired only through the coarseness of our senses. . . . Leibnitz followed 
these arguments to some extent, but he could not rest content in assuming that 
matter was composed of a finite number of very small parts. His mathematical 
mind forced him to carry out the argument in infinitum. And what became 
of the atoms then? They lost their extension and they retained only their 
property of resistance; they were the centers of force. They were reduced 
to mathematical points . . . but if their extension in space was nothing; so 
much fuller was their inner life. Assuming that inner existence, such as that 
of the human mind, is a new dimension, not a geometrical but a metaphysical 
dimension . . . having reduced the geometrical extension of the atoms to 
nothing, Leibnitz endowed them with an infinite extension in the direction of 
their metaphysical dimension. After having lost sight of them in the worid of 
space, the mind has, as it were, to dive into a metaphysical world to find and 
grasp the real essence of what appears in space merely as a mathematical point 
... As a cone stands on its point, or a perpendicular straight line cuts a 
horizontal plane only in one mathematical point, but may extend infinitely in 
height and depth, so the essences of things real have only a punctual existence 
in this physical world of space; but have an infinite depth of inner life in the 
metaphysical world of thought."^. . . 

This is the spirit, the very root of occult doctrine and thought The 
" Spirit-Matter " and " Matter-Spirit " extend infinitely in depth, and 
like " the essence of things " of Leibnitz, our essence of things real \s 
at the seventh depth; while the unreal and gross matter of Science and 
the external world, is at the lowest end of our perceptive senses. The 
Occultist knows the worth or worthlessness of the latter. 

The student must now be shown the fundamental distinction between 
the system of Leibnitz ••* and that of occult philosophy, on the question 
of the Monads, and this may be done with his Monadology before us. 
It may be correctly stated that were Leibnitz' and Spinoza's systems 
reconciled, the essence and Spirit of esoteric philosophy would be made 

990. P^e 144. 
991. The real ipclUnff of the name — ai spelled by htmaelf — it LdbaU. He ««■ «C 

Slavonian deaoent though a German bybirth. 



SPINOZA AND LEIBNITZ 629 

to appear. From the shock of the two — as opposed to the Cartesian 
system — emerge the truths of the Archaic doctrine. Both opposed the 
metaphysics of Descartes. His idea of the contrast of two substances 
— Extension and Thought — radically differing from each other and 
mutually irreducible, was too arbitrary and too unphilosophical for 
them. Thus Leibnitz made of the two Cartesian substances two attri- 
butes of one universal imity, in which he saw God. Spinoza recognized 
but one universal indivisible substance and absolute all, like Parabrah- 
mam. Leibnitz, on the contrary perceived the existence of a plurality 
of substances. There was but one for Spinoza ; for Leibnitz an infini- 
tude of Beings, from, and in, the One. Hence, though both admitted 
but one real Entity, while Spinoza made it impersonal and indivisible, 
Leibnitz divided his personal Deity into a number of divine and semi- 
divine Beings. Spinoza was a subjective, Leibnitz an objective Pan- 
theist, yet both were great philosophers in their intuitive perceptions. 

Now, if these two teachings were blended together and each cor- 
rected by the other, — and foremost of all the One Reality weeded of 
its personality — there would remain as sum total a true spirit of eso- 
teric philosophy in them; the impersonal, attributeless, absolute divine 
essence which is no " Being," but the root of all being. Draw a deep 
line in your thought between that ever-incognizable essence, and the, 
as invisible, yet comprehensible Presence (Mulaprakriti), or Shekinah, 
from beyond and through which vibrates the Sound of the Verbum, 
and from which evolve the numberless hierarchies of intelligent Egos, 
of conscious as of semi-conscious, perceptive and apperceptive Beings, 
whose essence is spiritual Force, whose Substance is the Elements and 
whose Bodies (when needed) are the atoms — and our doctrine is 
there. For, says Leibnitz, "the primitive Element of every material 
body being Force, which has none of the characteristics of {objective) 
matter — it can be conceived but can never be the object of any imagin- 
ative representation." That which was for him the primordial and 
ultimate element in every body and object was thus not the material 
atoms, or molecules, necessarily more or less extended, as those of 
Epicurus and Gassendi, but, as Mertz shows, immaterial and meta- 
physical atoms, " mathematical points " ; or real souls — as explained 
by Henri Lachelier,'** his French biographer. " That which exists out- 
side of us in an absolute manner, are Souls whose essence is force." ••• 

Thus, reality, in the manifested world is composed of a unity of 
units, so to say, immaterial (from our standpoint) and infinite. This 
Leibnitz calls " Monads," Eastern philosophy " Jtvas " — and Occult- 
ism gives it, with the Kabalists and all the Christians, a variety of 

992. Professiur agrigi dt PhihsophU. 993. MonodohgU, Introd. 



630 



TH^ SECRET DOCTRINE 



names. They are with us, as with Leibnitz — " the expression of the 
universe," ••* and every physical point is but the phenomenal expression 
of the noumenal, metaphysical point. His distinction between percep- 
Hon and apperception, is the philosophical though dim expression of 
the Esoteric teachings. His " reduced universes," of which " there are 
as many as there are Monads " — is the chaotic representation of our 
Septenary System with its divisions and sub-divisions. 

As to the relation his Monads bear to our Dhyan-Chohans, Cosmic 
Spirits, Devas and Elementals, we may reproduce briefly the opinion 
of a learned and thoughtful theosophist, Mr. H. A. Bjerregaard, on the 
subject. In an excellent paper " On the Elementals, the Elementary 
Spirits, and the relationship between them and Human Beings," read 
by him before the "Aryan Theosophical Society of New York," ••' Mr. 
Bjerregaard formulates distinctly his opinion: 

To Spinoza, substance is dead and inactive, but to Leibnitz's penetrating mind 
everything is living activity and active energy. In holding this view, he comes 
infinitely nearer the Orient than any other thinker of his day, or after him. 
His discovery that an active energy forms the essence of Substance is a principle 
that places him in direct relationship to the Seers of the East. 

And the lecturer proceeds to show that to Leibnitz atoms and ele- 
ments are centers of force, or rather " spiritual beings whose very 
nature is to act," for the elementary particles are not acting mechanic- 
ally, but from an internal principle. They are incorporeal spiritual 
units ("substantial," however, but not immaterial in our sense) inac- 
cessible to all changes from without, and indestructible by any external 
force. Leibnitz's monads, adds the lecturer, 

differ from atoms in the following particulars, which are very important for 
us to remember, otherwise we shall not be able to see the difference between 
elementals and mere matter. . . . Atoms are not distinguished from each 
other, they are qualitatively alike; but one monad differs from every other 
monad qualitatively ; and every one is a peculiar world to itself. Not so with 
atoms; they are absolutely alike quantitatively and qualitatively, and possess no 
individuality of their own.*^ Again, the atoms (molecules, rather) of material- 
istic philosophy can be considered as extended and divisible, while the monads 
are mere mathematical points and indivisible. Finally, and this is a point where 



994. "I^ibnitz't Dynamism/' sayt Pro- 
fesaor Lachelier, " would oiFer but little dif- 
ficulty if, with him, the Monad had remained 
a simple atom of blind force. But . . ." 
One perfectly understands the perplexity of 
modern materialism! 

995. See Patb^ Nos. 10 and 11, of Jan. 
and Feb. 1887. 

996. I«eibnitz was an absolutg Idealist in 



maintaining that " material atoms are con- 
trary to reason " (Systhng Nonveau, £rd- 
mann, p. 126, col. 2). For him matter was 
a simple representation of the monad, whe- 
ther human or atomic. Monads, he thought 
(as we do), are everywhere. Thus the hu- 
man soul is a monad, and every cell in the 
human body has its monad, as every cell in 
animal, vegetable, and even in the (so- 
called) inorganic bodies. His atoms are the 



MAYA AND MAHAMAYA 



631 



these monads of Leibnitz closely resemble the elementals of mystic philosophy 

— these monads are representative Beings. Every monad reflects every other. 
Every monad is a living mirror of the Universe within its own sphere. And 
mark this, for upon it depends the power possessed by these monads, and upon 
this depends the work they can do for us; in mirroring the world, the monads 
are not mere passive reflective agents, but spontaneously self-active; they pro- 
duce the images spontaneously, as the soul does a dream. In every monad, 
therefore, the adept may read everything, even the future. Every monad or 
Elemental is a looking-glass that can speak. . . . 

It is at this point that Leibnitz's philosophy breaks down. There 
is no provision made, nor any distinction established, between the 
" Elemental " monad and that of a high Planetary Spirit, or even the 
human monad or Soul. He even goes so far as to sometimes doubt 
whether "God has ever made anything but Monads or substances 
without extension." '^^ He draws a distinction between Monads and 
Atoms,*** because, as he repeatedly states, " bodies with all their quali- 
ties are only phenomenal, like the rainbow. . . . Corpora omnia cum 
omnibus qualitatibus suis non sunt aliud quam phenomena bene fundata, 
ut Iris " ••• — but soon after he finds a provision for this in a substan- 
tial correspondence, a certain metaphysical bond between the monads 

— vinculum substantiate. Esoteric philosophy, teaching an objective 
Idealism — though it regards the objective Universe and all in it as 
Maya, temporary illusion — draws a practical distinction between col- 
lective illusion, Mahamayd, from the purely metaphysical standpoint, 
and the objective relations in it between various conscious Egos so 
long as this illusion lasts. The adept, therefore, may read the future 
in an Elemental Monad, but he has to draw for this object a great 
number of them, as each monad represents only a portion of the King- 
dom it belongs to. " It is not in the object, but in the modification of 
the cognition of the object that the Monads are limited. They all go 
confusedly to the infinite, to the all, but they are all limited and dis- 
tinguished by the degrees of distinct perceptions."^**®^ And as Lcib- 



molecules of modem Science, and hit mon- 
ada tboK simpU atoms that materialistic Sd* 
ence takes on faith, though it will never suc- 
ceed in intervirwing them — except in ima- 
gination. But Leibnitz is rather contradic- 
tory in his views about Monads. He speaks 
of his Metaphysical Points and Formal 
Atoms, at one time as realities, occupying 
space; at another as pure Spiritual ideas; 
then again endows them with objectivity and 
aggregates and positions in their co-relations. 

997. Bxamen des Principes du P. Male- 
branche, 

998. The atoms of I«eibnits have, in truth, 



nothing but the name in common with the 
atoms of the Greek Materialists, or even 
the molecules of modem Science. He calls 
them formal atoms, and compares them to 
the substantial forms of Aristotle. (See 
Systhne Nouveau, | 3) 

999. Letter to Father Desbosses, Corres- 
pondence, letter xviii. 

1000. Monadologie, 1 60. LeibniU, like 
Aristotle, calls the created or emanated mon- 
ads (the Clementals issued from (>>smic Spi- 
rits or Godi) — Bntelechies, *ErreX^x'*At 
— and ** incorporeal automata." (| 18, Mon- 
adologie.) 



632 



THE SECRET DOCTUNE 



nitz explains, "All the portions of the Universe are distinctly repre- 
sented in the Monads, but some are reflected in one monad, some in 
another**; but a number of monads could represent simultaneously 
the thoughts of the two millions of inhabitants of Paris. 

But what say the Occult Sciences to this, and what do they 
add? 

They say that what is called collectively Monads by Leibnitz — 
roughly viewed, and leaving every subdivision out of calculation, for 
the present**^* — may be separated into three distinct Hosts, which, 
counted from the highest planes, are, firstly, "gods," or conscious, 
spiritual Egos; the intelligent architects, who work after the plan 
in the Divine Mind. Then come the Elementals, or Monads, who form 
collectively and unconsciously the grand Universal Mirrors of every- 
thing connected with their respective realms. Lastly, the atoms, or 
material molecules, which are informed in their turn by their appercep- 
tive monads, just as every cell in a human body is so informed.**" 
There are shoals of such informed atoms which, in their turn, inform 
the molecules; an infinitude of monads, or Elementals proper, and 
cotmtless spiritual Forces — Monadless, for they are pure incorporeali- 
ties,*^' except under certain laws, when they assume a form — not 
necessarily human. Whence the substance that clothes them — the 
apparent organism they evolve around their centers? The Formless 
("Arupa") Radiations, existing in the harmony of Universal Will, 
and being what we term the collective or the aggregate of Cosmic Will 
on the plane of the subjective Universe, unite together an infinitude of 
monads — each the mirror of its own Universe — and thus individual- 
ize for the time being an independent mind, omniscient and universal ; 
and by the same process of magnetic aggregation they create for them- 
selves objective, visible bodies, out of the interstellar atoms. For atoms 



1001. ThcM three "rotigh diritloni" cor- 
reipond to spirU, mind (or soul), and body, 
in the human constitution. 

1002. See the dotinc pages of Book L 

1003. Brother C H. A. Bjerregaard, in 
his lecture (already mentioned), warns his 
audience not to regard the SepHrotk too much 
as individualiHes, but to avoid at the same 
time seeing in them abstractions, " We shall 
nerer arrive at the truth/' he says, "much 
less the power of associoHng with thost ct- 
Ustials, until we return to the simplicity and 
fearlessness of the primitiTe ages, when men 
mixed freely with the gods, and the gods 



descended among men and guided them in 
truth and hoUness " (No. 10, Pmih). . . . 
" There are several designations for ' angcb ' 
in the Bible which clearly show that bei^a 
like the Elementals of the Kabala and the 
monads of Leibnkz, must be ttn der stoo d by 
that term rather than that which is coamoo- 
ly understood. They are called * mornli^ 
stars,' 'flaming fires,' 'the mighty 
and St Paul sees them in his 
vision as ' Principalities and PdwersL* 
names as these preclude the Mca of 
ality, and we find ourselves eompelfod to think 
of them as impersonal Kyistmcrs ... as an 
infiugnct, a spiritual substance, or camse%9Ms 
Pores:' {Path, No. 11, p. 323) 



THE WHEELS OF ure 633 

and Monads, associated or dissociated, simple or complex, are, from 
the moment of the first differentiation, but the principles, corporeal, 
psychic and Spiritual, of the '* Gods," — themselves the Radiations of 
primordial nature. Thus, to the eye of the Seer, the higher Planetary 
Powers appear under two aspects : the subjective — as influences, and 
the objective — as mystic forms, which, under Karmic law, become a 
Presence, Spirit .^uid Matter being One, as repeatedly stated. Spirit 
is matter on the seventh plane; matter is Spirit — on the lowest point 
of its cyclic activity; and both — are Maya. 

Atoms are called " Vibrations " in Occultism ; also " Sound " — c.<t i / / 
collectively. This does not interfere with Mr. Tyndall's scientific dis- ^ '- 

covery. He traced, on the lower rung of the ladder of monadic being, I / \ ^ ; 
the whole course of the atmospheric vibrations — and this constitutes 
the objective part of the process in nature. He has traced and recorded 
the rapidity of their motion and transmission; the force of their 
impact; their setting up vibrations in the tjrmpanum and their trans- 
mission of these to the otoliths, etc., etc., till the vibration of the audi- 
tory nerve commences — and a new phenomenon now takes place : the 
subjective side of the process or the sensation of Sound. Does he 
perceive or see it? No; for his speciality is to discover the behavior 
of matter. But why should not a psychic see it, a spiritual seer, whose 
^"Tnner Eye is opened, and who can see through the veil of matter? The "" 
waves and undulations of Science are all produced by atoms propelling , 

their molecules into activity from within. Atoms fill the immensity ' 

of Space, and by their continuous vibration are that motion which 
keeps the wheels of Life perpetually going. It is that inner work 
that produces the natural phenomena called the correlation of Forces. 
Only, at the origin of every such " force," there stands the conscious 
guiding noumenon thereof — Angel or God, Spirit or Demon — ruling 
powers, yet the same. 

As described by Seers — those who can see the motion of the inter- 
stellar shoals, and follow them in their evolution clairvoyantly — they 
are dazzling, like specks of virgin snow in radiant sunlight. Their 
velocity is swifter than thought, quicker than any mortal physical eye 
could follow, and, as well as can be judged from the tremendous rapid- 
ity of their course, the motion is circular. . . . Standing on an open plain, 
on a mountain summit especially, and gazing into the vast vault above 
and the spatial infinitudes around, the whole atmosphere seems ablaze 
with them, the air soaked through with these dazzling coruscations. 
At times, the intensity of their motion produces flashes like the North- 
em lights during the Aurora Borealis. The sight is so marvelous, that 
as the Seer gazes into this inner world, and feels the scintillating 



634 THE SECRET DOCTUNE 

points shoot past him, he is filled with awe at the thought of other, 
still greater mysteries, that lie beyond, and within, this radiant 
ocean. . . . 

However imperfect and incomplete this explanation on ** Gods, Mon- 
ads and Atoms," it is hoped that some students and theosophists, 
at least, will feel that there may be indeed a close relation between 
materialistic Science, and Occultism, which is the complement and 
missing soul of the former. 



XVI 
CYCLIC EVOLUTION AND KARMA 

It is the Spiritual evolution of the inner, immortal man that forms 
the fundamental tenet in the Occult Sciences. To realize even distantly 
such a process, the student has to believe (a) in the one Universal Life, 
independent of matter (or what Science regards as matter) ; and (b) 
in the individual intelligences that animate the various manifestations 
of this Principle. Mr. Huxley does not believe in " Vital Force," 
others do. Dr. J. H. Hutchinson Stirling's work Concerning Proto- 
plasm has made no small havoc of this dogmatic negation. Professor 
Beale's decision is also in favor of a Vital Principle; and Dr. B. W. 
Richardson's lectures on the " Nervous Ether," have been sufficiently 
quoted from. Thus, opinions are divided. 

The ONE LIFE is closely related to the one law which governs the 
World of Being — Karma. Exoterically, this is simply and literally 
" action," or rather an " effect-producing cause." Esotcrically it is 
quite a different thing in its far-fetching moral effects. It is the unerr- 
ing Law of Retribution. To say to those ignorant of the real signifi- 
cance, characteristics and awful importance of this eternal immutable 
law, that no theological definition of a personal deity can give an idea 
of this impersonal, yet ever present and active Principle, is to speak 
in vain. Nor can it be called Providence. For Providence, with the 
Theists (the Christian Protestants, at any rate), rejoices in a personal 
male gender, while with the Roman Catholics it is a female potency, 
" Divine Providence tempers His blessings to secure their better 
effects," Wogan tells us. Indeed " He " tempers them, which Karma 
— a sexless principle — does not. 

Throughout the first two Parts, it was shown that, at the first flutter 
of renascent life, Svabhavat, " the mutable radiance of the Immutable 
Darkness unconscious in Eternity," passes, at every new rebirth of 
Kosmos, from an inactive state into one of intense activity; that it 



THE ROOTS AND CAUSES 635 

differentiates, and then begins its work through that differentiation. 
This work is Karma. 

The Cycles are also subservient to the effects produced by this 
activity. 

The one Cosmic atom becomes seven atoms on the plane of matter, and each 
is transformed into a center of energy; that same atom becomes seven rays on 
the plane of spirit, and the seven creative forces of nature, radiating from the 
root-essence . . . follow, one the right, the other the left path, separate till 
the end of the Kalpa, and yet are in close embrace. What unites them? Karma. 

The atoms emanated from the Central Point emanate in their turn 
new centers of energy, which, under the potential breath of Fohat, 
begin their work from within without, and multiply other minor cen- 
ters. These, in the course of evolution and involution, form in their 
turn the roots or developing causes of new effects, from worlds and 
" man-bearing " globes, down to the genera, species, and classes of all 
the seven kingdoms*®®* (of which we know only four). For "the 
blessed workers have received the Thyan-kam, in the eternity."*®®* 

" Thyan-kam " is the power or knowledge of guiding the impulses of 
cosmic energy in the right direction. 

The true Buddhist, recognizing no "personal god," nor any "Father" 
and " Creator of Heaven and Earth," still believes in an absolute 
consciousness, " Adi-Buddhi " ; and the Buddhist philosopher knows 
that there are Planetary Spirits, the " Dhyan Chohans." But though 
he admits of " spiritual lives," yet, as they are temporary in eternity, 
even they, according to his philosophy, are " the tmya of the day," the 
illusion of a " day of Brahma," a short manvantara of 4,320,000,000 
years. The " Yin-Sin " is not for the speculations of men, for the 
Lord Buddha has strongly prohibited all such inquiry. If the Dhyan 
Chohans and all the invisible Beings — the Seven Centers and their 
direct Emanations, the minor centers of Energy — are the direct reflex 
of the One Light, yet men are far removed from these, since the whole 
of the visible Kosmos consists of " self-produced beings, the creatures 
of Karma" Thus regarding a personal God "as only a gigantic 
shadow thrown upon the void of space by the imagination of ignorant 
men," "®® they teach that only " two things are (objectively) eternal, 
namely Akaia and Nirvana"; and that these are one in reality, and 
but a may& when divided. " Buddhists deny creation and cannot 
conceive of a Creator" " Everything has come out of Akasa (or 
Svabhavat on our earth) in obedience to a law of motion inherent in 

1004. Vidt Stana VI (Book I) and Com- 1006. Buddhist Catechism, by H. S. Ol- 
mentary. cott, President of the Tbeosophical Society. 

1005. Book of "The Aphorisms of Tson- [See Note 1.] 
kapa." 



636 ^HE SECRET DOCTRINE 

it, and after a certain existence passes away. Nothing ever came out 
of nothing." "^^ 

If a Vedantic Brahman of the Advaita Sect, when asked whether he 
believes in the existence of God, is always likely to answer, as JacoUiot 
was answered — " I am myself * God ' " ; a Buddhist (a Sinhalese 
especially) would simply laugh, and say in reply, " There is no God ; 
no Creation," Yet the root philosophy of both Advaita and Buddhist 
scholars is identical, and both have the same respect for animal life, for 
both believe that every creature on earth, however small and humble, 
" is an immortal portion of the immortal matter " — for matter with 
them has quite another significance than it has with either Christian 
or materialist — and that every creature is subject to Karma. 

The answer of the Brahman is one which would suggest itself to 
every ancient philosopher, Kabalist, and Gnostic of the early days. It 
contains the very spirit of the Delphic and Kabalistic commandments, 
for esoteric philosophy solved, ages ago, the problem of what man 
was, is and will be; of man's origin, life-cycle — interminable in its 
duration of successive incarnations or rebirths — and finally of his 
absorption into the source from which he started. 

But it is not physical Science that we can ever ask to read man for 
us, as the riddle of the Past, or that of the Future ; since no philosopher 
is able to tell us even what man is, as he is known both to physiology 
and psychology. In doubt whether man was " a god or beast," he is 
now connected with the latter and derived from an animal. No doubt 
that the care of analysing and classifying the human being as a terres- 
trial animal may be left to Science, which occultists — of all men — 
regard with veneration and respect. They recognize its ground and 
the wonderful work done by it, the progress achieved in physiolc^y, 
and even — to a degree — in biology. But man's inner, spiritual, 
psychic, or even moral, nature cannot be left to the tender mercies of 
an ingrained materialism ; for not even the higher psychological philo- 
sophy of the West is able, in its present incompleteness and tendency 
towards a decided agnosticism, to do justice to the inner; especially 
to his higher capacities and perceptions, and those states of conscious- 
ness, across the road to which such authorities as Mill draw a strong 
line, sajring " So far, and no farther shalt thou go." 

No Occultist would deny that man — no less than the elephant and 
the microbe, the crocodile and the lizard, the blade of grass or the 
crystal — is, in his physical formation, the simple product of the evolu- 
tionary forces of nature through a numberless series of transforma- 
tions ; but he puts the case differently. 

It is not against zoological and anthropological discoveries, based on 

1007. Buddhist Cattchism. 



TH^ SWING OF KARMA 



637 



the fossils of man and animal, that every mystic and believer in a divine 
soul inwardly revolts, but only against the uncalled-for conclusions built 
on preconceived theories and made to fit in with certain prejudices. 
Their premisses may or may not be always true ; and as some of these 
theories live but a short life, the deductions therefrom must ever be 
one-sided with materialistic evolutionists. Yet it is on the strength of 
such very ephemeral authority, that most of the men of science 
frequently receive undue honors where they deserve them the 
least**>«« 

To make the working of Karma, in the periodical renovations of the 
Universe, more evident and intelligible to the student when he arrives 
at the origin and evolution of man, he has now to examine with us 
the esoteric bearing of the Karmic Cycles upon Universal Ethics. The 
question is, do those mysterious divisions of time, called Yugas and 
Kalpas by the Hindus, and so very graphically — KvjcAo« — "cycle," 
ring or circle, by the Greeks, have any bearing upon, or any direct 
connexion with, human life? Even exoteric philosophy explains that 
these perpetual circles of time are ever returning on themselves, periodi- 
cally, and intelligently in Space and Eternity. There are " Cycles of 



1008. We refer those who would regard 
the ttatement as an impertinenoe or Umvit- 
enee against accepted Science, to Mr. James 
Hutchinson Stirling's work concerning *' Pro- 
toplasm/' which is a defense of a vitai Prin* 
dple vgrsus the Molecularists — Huxley, 
Tyndall, Vogt, and Co. — and request them 
to examine whether it is true or not to say 
that the scientific premisses may not be always 
correct, but that diey are accepted, ncYerthe* 
less, to fill up a gap or a bole in some be- 
loved materialistic hobby. Speaking of pro- 
tc^lasm and the organs of man, as '* viewed 
by Mr. Huxley," the author says: "Prob- 
ably then, in regard to any continuity in 
protoplasm of power, of form, or of sub- 
stance, we have seen lacunae enow. Nay, 
Mr. Huxley himself can be adduced in evid- 
ence on the same side. Not rarely do we 
find in his essay admissions of piobabix.ity. 
where it is csetainty that is alone in place. 
He says, for example: ' It is more than 
probable that when the vegetable world is 
thoroughly explored we shall find all plants 
in possession of the same powers.' iVhen a 
conclusion is decidedly announced, it is ra- 
ther disappointing to be told, as here, that 
the premisses are still to collect [11] . . . 



Again, here is a passage in which he is seen 
to cut his own ' basis * from beneath his own 
feet After telling us that all forms of proto- 
plasm consist of carbon, hydrogen, oxygen 
and nitrogen ' in very complex union,' be 
continues: ' To this complex combination, 
the nature of which has never been deter- 
mined wvish exactness i\\}, the name of pro- 
tein has been applied.' This, plainly, is an 
identification, on Mr. Huxley's own part, of 
protoplasm and protein; and what is said of 
one, being necessarily true of the other, it 
follows that he admits the nature of proto- 
plasm never to have been determined with 
exactness, and that even in his eyes the lis 
is still sub Judice. This admission is streng- 
thened by the words, too, ' If we use this 
term — protein — with such caution as may 
properly arise out of our comparative ignor- 
ance of the things for which it stands.'" 
. . . etc., etc. (pp. 33 and 34, in reply to 
Mr. Huxley in Yeast.) 

This is the eminent Huxley, the king of 
physiology and biology, who is proven play- 
ing at blind man's buff with premisses and 
facts. What may not the "smaller fry" of 
science do after this! 



638 ^HE SECRET DOCTRINE 

matter " ^®^* and there are " Cycles of Spiritual evolution." Racial, 
national, and individual cycles. May not esoteric speculation allow us 
a still deeper insight into the workings of these? 
This idea is beautifully expressed in a very clever scientific work : — 

The possibility of rising to a comprehension of a system of co-ordination 
so far outreaching in time and space all reach of human observations, is a 
circumstance which signalizes the power of man to transcend the limitations 
of changing and inconsistent matter, and assert his superiority over all unstable 
and perishable forms of being. There is a method in the succession of events, 
and in the relation of co-existent things, which the mind of man seizes hold of ; 
and by means of this as a clue, he runs back or forward over aeons of material 
history of which human experience can never testify. Events germinate and 
unfold. They have a past which is connected with their present, and we fed 
a well-justified confidence that a future is appointed which will be similarly 
connected with the present and the past This continuity and unity of history 
repeat themselves before our eyes in all conceivable stages of progress. The 
phenomena furnish us the grounds for the generalization of two laws which arc 
truly principles of scientific divination, by which alone the human mind pene- 
trates the sealed records of the past and the unopened pages of the future. The 
first of these is the law of evolution, or, to phrase it for our purpose, the law 
of correlated successiveness or organised history in the individual, illustrated in 
the changing phases of every single maturing system of results. . . . These 
thoughts summon into our immediate presence the measureless past and the 
measureless future of material history. They seem almost to open vistas through 
infinity, and to endow the human intellect with an existence and a vision ex- 
empt from the limitations of time and space and finite causation, and lift it up 
toward a sublime apprehension of the Supreme Intelligence whose dwelling 
place is Eternity.*^ 

According to the teachings, Maya, or the illusive appearance of the 
marshaling of events and actions on this earth, changes, varying with 
nations and places. But the chief features of one's life are always in 
accordance with the " Constellation " one is bom under, or, we should 
say, with the characteristics of its animating principle or the deity that 
presides over it, whether we call it a Dhyan Chohan, as in Asia, or an 
Archangel, as with the Greek and Latin churches. In ancient Sjrmbol- 
ism it was always the Sun (though the Spiritual, not the visible, Sun 
was meant), that was supposed to send forth the chief Saviors and 
Avatars. Hence the connecting link between the Buddhas, the Avatars, 
and so many other incarnations of the highest Seven. The closer the 
approach to one's Prototype, " in Heaven," the better for the mortal 
whose personality was chosen, by his own personal deity (the seventh 
principle), as its terrestrial abode. For, with every effort of will 

1009. ''The Cycles of Matter/* a name given by Profesaor Wincbell to an Eaaay ol 
his written in 1860. 1010. World-Lift, pp. S35 and 54a. 



THE NETWORK OF DESTINY 639 

toward purification and unity with that " Self-god," one of the lower 
rays breaks and the spiritual entity of man is drawn higher and ever 
higher to the ray that supersedes the first, until, from ray to ray, the 
inner man is drawn into the one and highest beam of the Parent-SuN. 
Thus, " the events of humanity do run co-ordinately with the number 
forms," since the single units of that humanity proceed one and all 
from the same source — the central and its shadow, the visible Sun. 
For the equinoxes and solstices, the periods and various phases of the 
Solar course, astronomically and numerically expressed, are only the 
concrete symbols of the eternally living verity, though they do seem 
abstract ideas to uninitiated mortals. And this explains the extra- 
ordinary numerical coincidences with geometrical relations, as shown 
by several authors. 

Yes ; " our destiny is written in the stars ! " Only, the closer the 
tmion between the mortal reflection man and his celestial prototype, 
the less dangerous the external conditions and subsequent reincarnations 
— which neither Buddhas nor Christs can escape. This is not super- 
stition, least of all is it Fatalism, The latter implies a blind course of 
some still blinder power, and man is a free agent during his stay on 
earth. He cannot escape his ruling Destiny, but he has the choice of 
two paths that lead him in that direction, and he can reach the goal 
of misery — if such is decreed to him, either in the snowy white robes 
of the Martyr, or in the soiled garments of a volunteer in the iniquitous 
course ; for, there are external and internal conditions which affect the 
determination of our will upon our actions, and it is in our power to 
follow either of the two. Those who believe in Karma have to believe 
in destiny, which, from birth to death, every man is weaving thread by 
thread around himself, as a spider does his cobweb ; and this destiny is 
guided either by the heavenly voice of the invisible prototype outside of 
us, or by our more intimate astral, or inner man, who is but too often 
the evil genius of the embodied entity called man. Both these lead on 
the outward man, but one of them must prevail; and from the very 
beginning of the invisible affray the stem and implacable law of com- 
pensation steps in and takes its course, faithfully following the fluctua- 
tions. When the last strand is woven, and man is seemingly enwrapped 
in the net-work of his own doing, then he finds himself completely un- 
der the empire of this self-made destiny. It then either fixes him like 
the inert shell against the immovable rock, or carries him away like a 
feather in a whirlwind raised by his own actions, and this is — Karma. 

A materialist, treating upon the periodical creations of our globe, 
has expressed it in one sentence. "The whole past of the Earth is 
nothing but an unfolded present/* This was Biichner, who little sus- 
pected that he was repeating an axiom of the Occultists. It is quite 



640 TH^ SECRET DOCTRINE 

true also, as Burmeister (quoted in Force and Matter) remarks. 
that " the historical investigation of the development of the Earth has 
proved that now and then rest upon the same base ; that the past has 
been developed in the same manner as the present rolls on ; and that 
the Forces which were in action ever remained the same." 

The " Forces " — their noumena rather — are the same, of course ; 
therefore, the phenomenal Forces must be the same also. But how can 
any one feel so sure that the attributes of matter have not altered under 
the hand of Protean Evolution? How can any materialist assert with 
such confidence, as is done by Rossmassler, that '' this eternal con- 
formity in the essence of phenomena renders it certain that fire and 
water possessed at all times the same powers and ever will possess 
them "? Who are they "that darken counsel with words without 
knowledge," and where were the Huxleys and Buchners when the 
foundations of the earth were laid by the great Law? It is a funda- 
mental principle of the Occult philosophy, this same homogeneity of 
matter and immutability of natural laws, which are so much insisted 
upon by materialism; but that unity rests upon the inseparability of 
Spirit from matter, and, if the two are once divorced, the whole Kos- 
mos would fall back into chaos and non-being. Therefore, it is absol- 
utely false, and but an additional demonstration of the great conceit 
of our age, to assert (as men of science do) that all the great geological 
changes and terrible convulsions have been produced by ordinary and 
known physical forces. For these forces were but the tools and final 
means for the accomplishment of certain purposes, acting periodically, 
and apparently mechanically, through an inward impulse mixed up 
with, but beyond their material nature. There is a purpose in every 
important act of Nature, whose acts are all cyclic and periodical 
But spiritual Forces having been usually confused with the purdy 
physical, the former are denied by, and therefore, have to remain un- 
known to Science, because left unexamined.***" Says Hegel : 

The history of the World begins with its general aim; the realization of the 
Idea of Spirit — only in an implicit form {an sick), that is, as Nature; a hidden, 
most profoundly hidden unconscious instinct, and the whole process of History 
... is directed to rendering this unconscious impulse a consdoas one. Thus 
appearing in the form of merely natural existence, natural will — that whidi has 
been called the subjective side — physical craving, instinct, passion, private in- 
terest, as also opinion and subjective conception — spontaneously present them- 
selves at the very commencement This XHUt congeries of voHtions, inieresis 



1011. Men of science will say: We deny, the contrary? ... Do not, at any rate, deny 

because nothing of the kind has ever come 6 priori. Actual Science is nH tugtd^mtiy 

within the scope of our experience. But, as advanced to givo you tmctt nr^l.'* (La 

argued by Charles Richet, the physiologist: Sugioition Montalo H U Coi€nl doi Prokm- 



•« 



So be it, but have you at least denumstrated bUititJ) 



Cyclic WHEEts within wheels 641 

activities constitute the instruments and means of the world SPnuT for attaining its 
object; bringing it to consciousness and realizing it And this aim is none other 
than finding itself — coming to itself — and contemplating itself in concrete ac- 
tuality. But that those manifestations of vitality on the part of individuals and 
peoples, in which they seek and satisfy their own purposes, are at the same time 
the means and instruments of a higher power, of a higher and broader purpose 
of which they know nothing — which they realize unconsciously — might be made 
a matter of question ; rather has been questioned ... on this point I announced 
my view at the very outset, and asserted our hypothesis . . . and our belief that 
Reason governs the World and has consequently governed its history. In re- 
lation to this independently universal and substantial existence — all else is sub- 
ordinate, subservient to it, and the means for its development.**^ 

No metaphysician or theosophist could demur to these truths, which 
are all embodied in esoteric teachings. There is a predestination in the 
geological life of our globe, as in the history, past and future, of races 
and nations. This is closely connected with what we call Kofrma, and 
Western Pantheists, " Nemesis " and " Cycles." The law of evolution 
is now carrying us along the ascending arc of our cycle, when the ef- 
feds will be once more re-merged into, and re-become the (now neu- 
tralized) causes, and all things affected by the former will have regained 
their original harmony. This will be the cycle of our special " Round," 
a moment in the duration of the great cycle, or the Mahayuga. 

The fine philosophical remarks of Hegel are found to have their ap- 
plication in the teachings of Occult science, which shows nature ever 
acting with a given purpose, whose results are always dual. This was 
stated in our first Occult volumes, in Isis UnveUed,^^^* in the following 
words : — 

As our planet revolves once every year around the sun, and at the same time 
turns once in every twenty-four hours upon its own axis, thus traversing minor 
circles within a larger one, so is the work of the smaller cyclic periods accom- 
plished and recommenced, within the Great Saros. 

The revolution of the physical world, according to the ancient doctrine, is 
attended by a like revolution in the world of intellect — the spiritual evolution 
of the world proceeding in cycles, like the physical one. 

Thus we see in history a regular alternation of ebb and flow in the tide of 
human progress. The great kingdoms and empires of the world, after reaching 
the culmination of their greatness, descend again, in accordance with the same 
law by which they ascended ; till, having reached the lowest point, humanity re- 
asserts itself and mounts up once more, the height of its attainment being, by 
this law of ascending progression by cycles, somewhat higher than the point from 
which it had before descended. 

But these cycles — wheels within wheels, so comprehensively and 
ingeniously symbolized by the various Manus and Rishis in India, and 

1012. "On World Hiitory" in Phihsophyof History, p. 26 (Sibree't Eng. Trmna.). 

1013. VoL I, p. 34. 



642 



THE SECRET DOCTRINE 



by the Kabiri in the West***^* — do not affect all tnankind at one and 
the same time — as explained in the Racial division of Cycles}^^ 
Hence, as we see, the difficulty of comprehending, and discriminat- 
ing between them, with regard to their physical and spiritual effects^ 
without having thoroughly mastered their relations with, and action 
upon the respective positions of nations and races, in their destiny and 
evolution. This system cannot be comprehended if the spiritual action 
of these periods — pre-ordained, so to say by Karmic law — is separ- 
ated from their physical course. The calculations of the best astrolo- 
gers would fail, or at any rate remain imperfect, unless this dual action 
is thoroughly taken into consideration and dealt with upon these lines. 
And this mastery can be achieved only through initiation. 

The Grand Cycle includes the progress of mankind from the appear- 
ance of primordial man of ethereal form. It runs through the inner 
cycles of his (man's) progressive evolution from the ethereal down to 
the semi-ethereal and purely physical : down to the redemption of man 
from his coat of skin and matter, after which it continues running its 
course downward and then upward again, to meet at the culmination of 
a Round, when the manvantaric " Serpent swallows its tail " and seven 
minor cycles are passed. These are the great Racial Cycles which affect 
equally all the nations and tribes included in that special Race; but 
there are minor and national as well as tribal cycles within those, which 
run independently of each other. They are called in the Eastern eso- 
tericism the Karmic cycles. In the West, since Pagan Wisdom has 
been repudiated as having grown from and been developed by the 
dark powers supposed to be at constant war and in opposition to the 
little tribal Jehovah — the full and awful significance of the Greek 
Nemesis (or Karma) has been entirely forgotten. Otherwise Christ- 
ians would have better realized the profound truth that Nemesis is 
without attributes ; that while the dreaded goddess is absolute and im- 
mutable as a Principle, it is we ourselves — nations and individuals — 
who propel her to action and give the impulse to its direction. Kas ma- 
Nemesis is the creator of nations and mortals, but once created, it is 
they who make of her either a fury or a rewarding Angel. Yea — 



1014. This tymboUm does not prevent 
these now teemingly mythic pcnonagM from 
havinff mled the earth once upon a time 
under the human form of actual llTing, though 
truly dirine and god-like man. The opkilon 
of Colonel Vallancey (and also of Court de 
Gobelin) that the "nom^t of the Kabiri appear 
to be all alUgorical, and to have signified no 
more [?] than an almanac of the vidssitudet 
of the seasons — calculated for the operations 



of agriculture" (CotUeU do Rob, Hiborm^ 
No. 13» Proof. Sect. S) is as abmrd as Us 
assertion that Aeon, Kronoa, Saturn and Da- 
gon are all one, namely the ** patriarch 
Adam." The Kabiri were the instructors of 
mankind in agriculture because they 
the rogonU over the seasons and 
cycles. Hence it was they who regulated, aa 
planetary Spirits or "Angels'* (nesaengcrs), 
the myttorios of the or* of sgrkultarc. 



lOlS. See tub^ocfion 6. 



KARMA-NEMESiS 643 

"Wise arc they who worship Nemesis"*^ 

— as the chorus tells Prometheus. And as unwise they, who believe 
that the goddess may be propitiated by whatever sacrifices and prayers, 
or have her wheel diverted from the path it has once taken. "The 
triform Fates and ever mindful Furies" are her attributes only on 
earth, and begotten by ourselves. There is no return from the paths 
she cycles over; yet those paths are of our own making, for it is we, 
collectively or indiividually, who prepare them. Karma-Nemesis is the 
S3mon)mi of Providence, minus design, goodness, and every other finite 
attribute and qualification, so unphilosophically attributed to the latter. 
An Occultist or a philosopher will not speak of the goodness or cruelty 
of Providence ; but, identifying it with Karma-Nemesis, he will teach 
that nevertheless it guards tfie good and watches over them in this, as 
in future lives; and that it punishes the evil-doer — aye, even to his 
seventh rebirth. So long, in short, as the effect of his having thrown 
into perturbation even the smallest atom in the Infinite World of har- 
mony, has not been finally readjusted. For the only decree of Karma 

— an eternal and immutable decree — is absolute Harmony in the / 
world of matter as it is in the world of Spirit. It is not, therefore, ' 
Karma that rewards or punishes, but it is we, who reward or punish 
ourselves according to whether we work with, through and along 
with nature, abiding by the laws on which that Harmony depends, or 

— break them. 

Nor would the ways of Karma be inscrutable were men to work in 
union and harmony instead of disunion and strife. For our ignorance 
of those ways — ^ which one portion of mankind calls the ways of Pro- 
vidence, dark and intricate; while another sees in them the action of 
blind Fatalism; and a third, simple chance, with neither gods nor 
devils to guide them — would surely disappear, if we would but attrib- 
ute all these to their correct cause. With right knowledge, or at any 
rate with a confident conviction that our neighbors will no more work 
to hurt us than we would think of harming them, the two-thirds of the 
World's evil would vanish into thin air. Were no man to hurt his bro- 
ther, Karma-Nemesis would have neither cause to work for, nor wea- 
pons to act through. It is the constant presence in our midst of every 
element of strife and opposition, and the division of races, nations, 
tribes, societies and individuals into Cains and Abels, wolves and lambs, 
that is the chief cause of the " ways of Providence." We cut these 
numerous windings in our destinies daily with our own hands, while 
we imagine that we are pursuing a track on the royal high road of re- 
spectability and duty, and then complain of those ways being so intri- 

1016. Who drtad Karma-NemeaU wooldbc better. 



644 I^HE SECR^ DOCtRINE 

cate and so dark. We stand bewildered before the mystery of our own 
making, and the riddles of life that we will not solve, and then accuse 
the great Sphinx of devouring us. But verily there is not an accident 
in our lives, not a misshapen day, or a misfortune, that could not be 
traced back to our own doings in this or in another life. If one breaks 
the laws of Harmony, or, as a Theosophical writer expresses it, " the 
laws of life," one must be prepared to fall into the chaos one has oneself 
produced. For, according to the same writer, " the only conclusion one 
can come to is that these laws of life are their own avengers ; and con- 
sequently that every avenging Angel is only a typified representation of 
their re-action." 

Therefore, if any one is helpless before these immutable laws, it is 
not ourselves, the artificers of our destinies, but rather those angels, the 
guardians of harmony. Karma-Nemesis is no more than the (spirit- 
ual) d3mamical effect of causes produced and forces awakened into 
activity by our own actions. It is a law of occult dynamics that ''a 
given amount of energy expended on the spiritual or astral plane is 
productive of far greater results than the same amount expended on 
the physical objective plane of existence." 

This state will last till man's spiritual intuitions are fully opened, 
which will not happen before we fairly cast off our thick coats of mat- 
ter; until we begin acting from tvithin, instead of ever following im- 
pulses from without; namely, those produced by our physical senses 
and gross selfish body. Until then the only palliative to the evik of life 
is union and harmony — a Brotherhood in actu, and altruism not sim- 
ply in name. The suppression of one single bad cause will suppress not 
one, but a variety of bad effects. And if a Brotherhood or even a num- 
ber of Brotherhoods may not be able to prevent nations from occasion- 
ally cutting each other's throats — still unity in thought and action, and 
philosophical research into the mysteries of being, will always prevent 
some, while trying to comprehend that which has hitherto remained to 
them a riddle, from creating additional causes in a world already so full 
of woe and evil. Knowledge of Karma gives the conviction that if — 

"... virtue in distress, and vice in triumph 
Make atheists of mankind,"**^ 

it is only because that mankind has ever shut its eyes to the great tmlh 
that man is himself his own savior as his own destroyer. That be 
need not accuse Heaven and the gods. Fates and Providence, of the 
apparent injustice that reigns in the midst of humanity. But let him 
rather remember and repeat this bit of Grecian wisdom, which warns 
man to forbear accusing That which — 

1017. Dnrden. 



ANCIENT AND MOD^N PROPHECIES 



64S 



"Just, though mysterious, leads us on unerring 
Through ways unmark'd from guilt to punishment ..." 

— which are now the ways and the high road on which move onward 
the great European nations. The Western Aryans had, every nation 
and tribe, like their Eastern brethren of the Fifth Race, their Golden 
and their Iron ages, their period of comparative irresponsibility, or 
the Satya age of purity, while now, several of them have reached their 

Iron Age, the Kali Yuga, an age Black with Horrors 

It is true, on the other hand, that the exoteric cycles of every nation 
have been correctly made to be derived from, and depend on, sidereal 
motions. The latter are inseparably blended with the destinies of 
nations and men. But in their purely physical sense, Europe knows 
of no other cycles than the astronomical, and makes its computations 
accordingly. Nor will it hear of any other than imaginary circles or 

circuits in the starry heavens that gird them — 

"With centric and eccentric scribbled o'er 
Cycle and epicycle, orb in orb ..." 
But with the pagans, with whom, as Coleridge has it — "... Time, 
cyclical time, was their abstraction of the Deity . . . ," that " Deity " 
manifesting co-ordinately with, and only through Karma, and being 
that karma-nemesis itself, the cycles meant something more than a 
mere succession of events, or a periodical space of time of more or less 
prolonged duration. For they were generally marked with recurrences 
of a more varied and intellectual character than are exhibited in the 
periodical return of seasons or of certain constellations. Modem wis- 
dom is satisfied with astronomical computations and prophecies based 
on unerring mathematical laws. Ancient Wisdom added to the cold 
shell of astronomy the vivifying elements of its soul and spirit — 
astrology. And, as the sidereal motions do regulate and determine 
other events on Earth — besides potatoes and the periodical disease of 
that useful vegetable — (a statement which, not being amenable to sci- 
entific explanation, is merely derided, while accepted) — those events 
have to be allowed to find themselves predetermined by even simple 
astronomical computations. Believers in astrology will understand our 
meaning, sceptics will laugh at the belief and mock the idea. Thus 
they shut their eyes, ostrich-like, to their own fate ****• 



1018. Not all, howerer, for there are men 
of Sdenee awakening to truth. This is what 
we read: " Whatever way we turn our eyes 
we encounter a mjrstery ... all in Nature 
for us it IA# unknown, . . . Yet they 
are numerous, those superfidal minds for 
whom nothing can be produced by natural 
forget outfide of facts obferved long ago, 



consecrated in books and grouped more or 
less skilfully with the help of theories whose 
ephemeral duration ought, by this time, to 
have demonstrated their insu£Sciency. . . . 
I do not pretend to conttsi tho possibility of 
invisibig Beings, of a nature different from 
ours and susceptible of moving matter to ac- 
tion, |*rofound philosophers h«ve admitted 



646 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

This because their little historical period, so called, allows them no 
margin for comparison. Sidereal heaven is before them ; and though 
their spiritual vision is still unopened and the atmospheric dust of ter- 
restrial origin seals their sight and chains it to the limits of physical 
systems, still they do not fail to perceive the movements and note the 
behavior of meteors and comets. They record the periodical advents 
of those wanderers and " flaming messengers," and prophesy, in con- 
sequence, earthquakes, meteoric showers, the apparition of certain 
stars, comets, etc., etc. Are they soothsayers for all that? No, they 
are learned astronomers. 

Why, then, should occultists and astrologers, as learned, be disbe- 
lieved, when they prophesy the return of some cyclic event on the same 
mathematical principle? Why should the claim that they know it be 
ridiculed? Their forefathers and predecessors, having recorded the 
recurrence of such events in their time and day, throughout a period 
embracing himdreds of thousands of years, the conjunction of the same 
constellations must necessarily produce, if not quite the same, at any 
rate, similar effects. Are the prophecies derided, because of the claim 
of the hundreds of thousands of years of observation, and the millions 
of years of the htmian races? In its turn modem Science is laughed 
at for its far more modest geological and anthropological figures, by 
those who hold to Biblical chronology. Thus Karma adjusts even hu- 
man laughter at the mutual expense of sects, learned societies, and in- 
dividuals. Yet in the prognostication of such future events, at any rate, 
all foretold on the authority of cyclic recurrences, there is no psychic 
phenomenon involved. It is neither prevision, nor prophecy; no more 
than is the signalling of a comet or star, several years before its appear- 
ance. It is simply knowledge and mathematically correct computations 
which enable the Wise Men op the East to foretell, for instance, that 
England is on the eve of such or another catastrophe ; France, nearing 
such a point of her cycle, and Europe in general threatened with, or 
rather, on the eve of, a cataclysm, which her own cycle of racial Karma 
has led her to. The reliability of the information depends, of course, 
on the acceptation or rejection of the claim for a tremendous period of 
historical observation. Eastern Initiates maintain that they have pre- 
served records of the racial development and of events of universal 

k in all epochs m a conaeqncnoe of the than I deny tonl while tryinf to *'*pMii eer* 

great law of continnity which rules the Unl- tain facts without their hypotheala. . . . ** 

▼erse. That intellectual life, which we see Th* Non-Defined Forces, Hittoriemt mmd Er* 

starting in some way from non-being {nhint) perimental Resecrchet, page 3. The above Is 



and gradually reaching man, can it stop written by A. de Rorhas, a well-knowB 

abruptly at man to reappear only in the in- of science in France, his work befa^ out oi 

finite, in the sovereign regulator of the the signs of the time. (Psaris: 

world? This is Uttle probable." Therefore, Bonkrard St Gennain, 1887.) 
f . . " I no more deny the existence of Spirits 



ASTROLOGY A SCIENCE 647 

import ever since the beginning of the Fourth Race — that which pre- 
ceded being traditional. Moreover, those who believe in Seership and 
Occult powers will have no difficulty in crediting the general character, 
at least, of the information given, even if traditional, once the latter is 
checked and corrected by the corroboration of clairvoyance and esoteric 
knowledge. But in the present case no such metaphysical belief is 
claimed as our chief dependence, but a proof is given on what, to every 
Occultist, is quite scientific evidence — the records preserved through 
the Zodiac for incalculable ages. 

It is now amply proved that even horoscopes and judiciary astrology 
are not quite based on a fiction, and that stars and constellations, con- 
sequently, have an occult and mysterious influence on, and connexion 
with, individuals. And if with the latter, why not with nations, races, 
and mankind in bulk? This, again, is a claim made on the authority 
of the Zodiacal records. We shall examine then, if you please, how 
far the Zodiac was known to the ancients, and how far it is forgotten 
by the modems. 



XVII 
"THE ZODIAC AND ITS ANTIQUITY 



» 



" All, men are apt to have a high conceit of their own understanding, 
and to be tenacious of the opinions they profess," said Jordan, justly 
adding to this — "and yet almost all men are guided by the under- 
standings of others, not by their own; and may be said more truly to 
adopt, than to beget, their opinions." 

This becomes doubly true in the matter of scientific opinions upon 
h)rpotheses offered for consideration — the prejudice and preconcep- 
tions of " authorities," so called, often deciding upon questions of the 
most vital importance for history. There are several such predeterm- 
ined opinions among our learned Orientalists, yet few are more unjust 
or illogical than the general error with regard to the antiquity of the 
Zodiac. Thanks to the hobby of some German Orientalists, English 
and American Sanskritists have accepted Professor Weber's opinion 
that the peoples of India had no idea or knowledge of the Zodiac prior 
to the Macedonian invasion, and that it is from the Greeks that the 
ancient Hindiis imported it into their country. We are further told, by 
several other " authorities," that no Eastern nation knew of the Zodiac 
before the Hellenes kindly acquainted their neighbors with their inven- 
tion. This, in the face of the Book of Job, declared, even by them- 
selves, to be the oldest in the Hebrew canon, certainly prior to Moses, 
and which speaks of the making "of Arcturus, Orion, and Pleiades 



648 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

(Ash, Kesil, and Khimah) and the chambers of the South" ;*®^* of Scor- 
pio and the Massaroth — the twelve signs/***** which words, if they 
mean anything, imply knowledge of the Zodiac even among the nomadic 
Arabic tribes. The Book of Job, they say, precedes Homer and Hcsiod 
by at least one thousand years — the two Greek poets having themselves 
flourished some eight centuries before the Christian era (!!). One 
who prefers, by the bye, to believe Plato, who shows Homer flourish- 
ing far earlier, could point to a number of Zodiacal signs mentioned in 
the Iliad and the Odyssey, in the Orphic poems, and elsewhere. But 
since the cock-and-bull hypothesis of some modem critics to the effect 
that neither Orpheus, nor yet Homer and Hesiod, ever existed, it would 
seem time lost to mention these Archaic authors at all. The Arabian 
Job will suflice ; unless, indeed, his volume of lamentations, along with 
the poems of the two Greeks, adding to them those of Linus, should 
now be also declared to be the patriotic forgery of the Jew Aristobulus. 
But if the Zodiac was known in the days of Job, how could the civil- 
ized and philosophical Hindus have remained ignorant of it? 

Risking the arrows of modem criticism — rather blunted by misuse 
— the reader may be made acquainted with Bailly's learned opinion 
upon the subject. Inferred speculations may be shown to be erroneous. 
Mathematical calculations stand on more secure grounds. Taking as 
a starting point several astronomical references in Job, Bailly devised a 
very ingenious means of proving that the earliest founders of the sci- 
ence of the Zodiac belonged to an antediluvian, primitive people. The 
fact that he seems willing to see in Thoth, Seth, and in Fohi (of China), 
some of the Biblical patriarchs, does not interfere with the validity of 
his proof as to the antiquity of the Zodiac.*®** Even accepting, for 
argument's sake, his cautious 3700 years b. c. as the correct age of the 
science, this date proves in the most irrefutable way that it was not the 
Greeks who invented the Zodiac, for the simple reason that they did not 
yet exist as a nation thirty-seven centuries b. c. — not as a historical 
race admitted by the critics, at any rate. Bailly then calculated the 
period at which the constellations manifested the atmospheric influence 
called by Job "sweet influences of the Pleiades "; *•" (in Hebrew, 
Khimah, see Job, xxxviii. 31) ; of the KesU (Orion) ; and that of the 
desert rains with reference to Scorpio, the eighth constellation; and 
found that in presence of the eternal conformity of those divisions of 
the zodiac and names of the planets applied in the same order every- 
where and always ; and in presence of the impossibility of attributing 

1019. ix, 9. wtrtn ttan berond the BaU, wlikh 

1020. nacrW, 31. 32. •* *^ be«limiii« of iprliif. Tbey 

▼ery occult mranlnf in the HindA 

1021. Astr^nomU AuHqm4, pWlowphy, and are co n nected witk 

1022. The PUiadt, at all know, are tlw other mjtdc prindplca in Natnie, 



THE ZODIAC IN THE BIBLE 649 

it all to chance and coincidence^ " which never creates such similarities," 
there must be allowed for the zodiac a great antiquity indeed.^®** 

Again, if the Bible is supposed to be an authority on any matter 
(and there are some who still believe so, whether from Christian or 
Kabalistical considerations), then the zodiac is clearly mentioned in 
// Kings, xxiii. 5. Before the " book of the law " was " found " by 
Hilkiah, the high priest (xxii.), the signs of the zodiac were known 
and worshiped. They were held in the same adoration as the sun and 
moon, since the "priests, whom the kings of Judah had ordained to 
bum incense . . . unto Baal, to the sun, moon, and to the planets, and 
to all the host of heaven," or the twelve signs or constellations, as the 
marginal note in the English Bible explains,*®** had followed the in- 
jtmction for centuries. They were stopped in their idolatry only by 
King Josiah, 624 years b. c. 

The Old Testament is full of allusions to the twelve zodiacal signs, 
and the whole scheme is built upon it — heroes, personages, and events. 
Thus in the dream of Joseph, who saw eleven "stars" bowing to the 
twelfth, which was his "star," the zodiac is meant. The Roman Cath- 
olics have discovered in it, moreover, a prophecy of Christ, who is that 
twelfth star, they say, and the eleven apostles; the absence of the 
twelfth being also regarded as a prophetic allusion to the treachery of 
Judas. The twelve sons of Jacob are again a reference to the same, as 
justly pointed out by Villalpandus.*®*" Sir James Malcolm, in his His- 
tory of Persia,^^^^ shows the Dabistan echoing all such traditions about 
the Zodiac. He traces the invention of it to the palmy days of the 
golden age of Iran, remarking that one of the said traditions maintains 
that the genii of the planets are represented under the same shapes and 
figures they had assumed, when they showed themselves to several holy 
prophets, and have thus led to the establishment of the rites based on 
the Zodiac. 

Pythagoras, and after him Philo Judaeus, held the number 12 as very 
sacred. " The dodecahedron is a perfect number." It is the one among 
the signs of the Zodiac, Philo adds, that the sun visits in twelve months, 
and it is to honor that sign that Moses divided his nation into twelve 
tribes, established the twelve cakes ^^" of the shewbread, and placed 
twelve precious stones around the ephod of the pontiffs.*®** 

According to Seneca, Berosus taught prophecy of every future event 
and cataclysm by the Zodiac; and the time fixed by him for the con- 
flagration of the world (/>ra/flya),. and another for a deluge, is found 
to answer to the time given in an ancient Egyptian pap)rrus. It comes 

1023. See Astronomic Antique, pp. 65-74. 1024. See II Kings, xxiii. 5. 
1025. Templt dt Jirusoltm, Vol. II, 2nd part, chap, xxx 1026. Chap, vil 

;027. Levit, xxiv. 5, ^028, Sec De Profugis, xxxiit 



650 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

at every renewal of the cycle of the sidereal year of 25,868 years. The 
names of the Akkadian months were called by, and derived from, the 
names of the signs of the Zodiac, and the Akkadians themselves are 
far earlier than the Chaldaeans. Mr. Proctor shows, in his Myths and 
Marvels of Astronomy, that the ancient astronomers had acquired a 
system of the most accurate astronomy 2400 years b. c. ; the Hindus 
date their Kali Yug from a great periodical conjunction of the planets 
thirty-one centuries b. c. ; and withal, it is the Greeks belonging to the 
expedition of Alexander the Great, who were the instructors of the 
Aryan Hindus in astronomy! 

Whether the origin of the Zodiac is Aryan or Egyptian, it is still of 
an immense antiquity. Simplicius (Vlth cent. a. d.) writes that he 
had always heard that the Egyptians had kept astronomical observa- 
tions and records for the last 630,000 years. This statement appears to 
frighten Mr. G. Massey, who remarks on this in his Natural Genesis ^•^ 
that " if we read this number of years by the month which Eudoxus 
said the Egyptians termed a year, that would still yield the length of 
two cycles of precession (or 51,736 years). Diogenes Laertius carried 
back the astronomical calculations of the Egyptians to 48,863 3rears 
before Alexander the Great*®*** Martianus Capella corroborates die 
same by telling posterity that the Egyptians had secretly studied astron- 
omy for over 40,000 years, before they imparted their knowledge to 
the world.*®** 

Several valuable quotations are made in the Natural Genesis with the 
view of supporting the author's theories, but they justify the teaching 
of the Secret Doctrine far more. For instance, Plutarch is quoted 
from his Life of Sulla, saying: 

One day when the sky was serene ... a sound was heard in it ... of a 
trumpet, so loud, shrill and mournful, that it affrighted . . . the world. The 
Tuscan sages said that it portended a new race of men, and a renovation of the 
world; for they affirmed that there were eight several kinds of men, all beins 
different in life and manners, and that Heaven had allotted each its time, which 
was limited by the circuit of the great year [25,868 years]. 

This reminds one strongly of our seven races of men, and of the 
eighth — the "animal man" — descended from the later Third Race; 
as also of the successive submersions and destruction of the continents 
which finally disposed of almost the entire bulk of that race. 

"The Assyrians," says lamblichos, "have not only preserved the 
memorials of seven and twenty myriads of years [270,000 years] as 
Hipparchos says they have, but likewise of the whole apocatastases 
and periods of the seven rulers of the world." ***** This is the calcola- 

1029. VoL n, page 318. 1030. Protm, 2. 

1031. Astronomy of the Ancionft, I^wis, p. 264. 1032. Proklof, in T kmmo s , B. I. 



THE JEWISH PATRIARCHS ZODIACAL SIGNS 651 

tion of the Esoteric Doctrine, as approximately as it can be. For 
1,000,000 of years are allowed for our present Root-race (the Fifth), 
and about 850,000 years since the submersion of the last large island 
(part of the Continent) , the Ruta of the Fourth Race, or the Atlantean ; 
while Daitya, a small island inhabited by a mixed race, was destroyed 
about 270,000 years ago, during the glacial period or thereabouts.**^" 
But the Seven Rulers, or the seven great D3masties of the diznne 
kings belong to the traditions of every great people of antiquity. 
Wherever twelve are mentioned, these are invariably the 12 signs 
of the zodiac. 

So patent is the fact, that the Roman Catholic writers — especially 
among the French Ultramontanes — have tacitly agreed to connect the 
twelve Jewish Patriarchs with the signs of the Zodiac. This is done in 
a kind of prophetico-mystic way, which would sound to pious and 
ignorant ears like a portentous sign, a tacit divine recognition of the 
" chosen people of God," whose finger has purposely traced in heaven, 
from the beginning of creation, the numbers of these patriarchs. For 
instance, these writers (De Mirville among others) recognize curiously 
enough all the characteristics of the 12 signs of the Zodiac, in the 
words addressed by the dying Jacob to his Sons, and in his definitions 
of the future of each Tribe.*®** Moreover, the respective banners of 
the same tribes are claimed to have exhibited the same symbols and 
the same names as the signs, repeated in the 12 stones of the Urim and 
Thummim, and on the 12 wings of the cherub. Leaving the proof of 
exactitude in the alleged correspondence to the said mystics, it is as 
follows: Man, or the Aquarius, is in the sphere of Reuben, who is 
declared as "unstable as water" (the Vulgate has it, to be "rushing 
like water ") ; Gemini, in the strong fraternal association of Simeon 
and Levi; Leo, in that of Judah, "the strong Lion" of his tribe, 
" the lion's whelp " ; the Pisces, in Zabulon, who " shall dwell at the 
haven of the sea " ; Taurus, in Issachar, because he is " a strong ass 
couching down," etc., and therefore associated with the stables ; Virgo- 
Scorpio, in Dan, who is described as " a serpent, an adder in the path 
that biteth," etc.; Capricornus in Naphtali, who is "a hind (a deer) 
let loose"; Cancer, in Benjamin, for he is "ravenous"; Libra, the 
" Balance," in Asher, whose " bread shall be fat " ; Sagittarius in 
Joseph, because "his bow abode in strength." To make up for the 
twelfth sign, Virgo, made independent of Scorpio, is Dinah, the only 
daughter of Jacob.*®" Tradition shows the alleged tribes carrying the 
12 signs on their banners. But the Bible is, besides these, full of 
theo-cosmological and astronomical symbols and personifications. 

It remains to wonder, and query — if the actual, living Patriarchs' 

1033. Vide Book n. 1034. S^ Genesis, ch. xUx. 1035, See Genesis, zlix. 



652 THE SEC&ET DOCTRINE 

destiny was so indissolubly wound up with the Zodiac — how it is Aat 
after the loss of the ten tribes, ten signs out of the twelve have not 
also miraculously disappeared from the sidereal fields? But this is 
of no great concern. Let us rather busy ourselves with the history 
of the Zodiac itself. 

Now the reader may be reminded of some opinions expressed on the 
subject by several of the highest authorities in Science. 

Newton believed that the invention of the Zodiac could be traced as 
far back as the expedition of the Argonauts; and Dulaure fixed its 
origin at 6500 years b. c, just 2496 years before the creation of the 
World according to the Bible chronology. 

Creuzer believes it very easy to show that most of the theogonies are 
intimately connected with religious calendars, and point to the Zodiac 
as their prime origin — if not identical with the Zodiac known to us 
now, then something very analogous to it He feels certain that the 
Zodiac and its mystic relations are at the bottom of all the mythologies, 
under one form or the other, and that it had existed in the old form 
for ages before; owing to some singular co-ordination of events, it 
was brought out in the present defined astronomical garb.**** 

Whether " the genii of the planets " (our Dhyan Chohans of supra- 
mundane spheres) showed themselves to "holy prophets" or not, as 
claimed in the Dabistan, it would seem that great la3mien and warriors 
were favored in the same way in days of old, when astrological fnagic 
and theophania went hand in hand in Chaldaea. For Xenophon, no 
ordinary man, narrates of Cyrus, that at the moment of his death that 
king was giving ardent thanks to gods and heroes, for having so often in- 
structed him themselves about the signs in heaven, hf o^panovs ^nj^icfoct .*••* 

Unless the science of the Zodiac is supposed to be of the highest anti- 
quity and universality, how account for its signs being traced in the old- 
est theogonies ? Laplace is said to have felt struck with amazement at 
the idea of the days of Mercury (Wednesday), Venus (Friday), 
Jupiter (Thursday), Saturn (Saturday), and others being related to 
the days of the week in the same order and with the same names in 
India as in Northern Europe. 

Try, if you can, with the present system of autochthonous dvilizatioos, to 
much in fashion in our day, to explain how nations with no ancestry, no tradi- 
tions or birthplace in common, could have succeeded in inventing a land of 
celestial phantasmagoria, a veritable imbroglio of sidereal denominations, without 
sequence or object, having no figurative relation with the constellatioos tbey 
represent, and still less, apparently, with the phases of our terrestrial life 
they are made to signify,*®** 

1036. Creowr, Book III, pafe 930. 1037. CyropidU, "Ant <hi Zoditqoe,- 

1038. PnfMnwtohfie, Vol IV. p. 61. 



tnZ SIGN of JONAS 6S3 

had there not been a general intention and a universat cause and belief, 
at the root of all this. Most truly has Dupuis asserted the same: 
" II est impossible de decouvrir le moindre trait de ressemblance entre 
les parties du ciel et les figures que les astronomes y ont arbitrairement 
tracces, et de I'autre cote, le hazard est impossible*' he says.*®** 

Most certainly chance is " impossible," There is no " chance " in 
Nature, wherein everything is mathematically co-ordinate and mutu- 
ally related in its units. " Chance," says Coleridge, " is but the pseudo- 
nym of God (or Nature), for those particular cases which He does 
not choose to subscribe openly with His sign manual." Replace the 
word " God " by that of Karma and it will become an Eastern axiom. 
Therefore, the sidereal "prophecies" of the zodiac, as they are called 
by Christian mystics, never point to any one particular event, however 
solemn and sacred it may be for some one portion of humanity, but to 
ever-recurrent, periodical laws in nature, understood but by the Initiates 
of the sidereal gods themselves. 

No occultist, no astrologer of Eastern birth, will ever agree with 
Christian mystics, or even with Kepler's mystical astronomy, his great 
science and erudition notwithstanding; simply because, if his premisses 
are quite correct, his deductions therefrom are one-sided and biased by 
Christian preconceptions. Where the latter finds a prophecy directly 
pointing at the Savior, other nations see a symbol of an eternal law 
decreed for the actual manvantara. Why see in the Pisces a direct 
reference to Christ — one of the several world-reformers, a Savior but 
for his direct followers, but only a great and glorious Initiate for all the 
rest — when that constellation shines as a symbol of all the past, pre- 
sent, and future Spiritual Saviors who dispense light and dispel mental / 
darkness? Christian symbologists have tried to prove that it was that 
of Ephraim (Joseph's son), the elect of Jacob, that therefore, it was at 
the moment of the Sun entering into the sign of the Fish (Pisces) that 
" the Elect Messiah," the Ix^ of the first Christians, had to be bom. 
But, if Jesus of Nazareth was that Messiah — was he really bom at 
that "moment," or was he made to be so bom by the adaptation of 
theologians, who sought only to make their preconceived ideas fit in 
with sidereal facts and popular belief? Everyone knows that the real 
time and year of the birth of Jesus are totally unknown. And it is the 
Jews, whose forefathers have made the word Dag signify both " fish " 
and " Messiah," who, during the forced development of their rabbin- 
ical language, are the first to deny this Christian claim. And what of 
the further facts that Brahmans also connect their "Messiah," the 
etemal Avatar Vishnu, with a fish and the Deluge, and that the Baby- 

1039. 0ntin4 dts CuUes, "Zodiaqnc." 



654 



THE SECRET DOCTRINE 



lonians made of their Dag-On, equally a fish and a Messiah, the Man- 
Fish and Prophet? 

There are those learned iconoclasts among Egyptologists, who say 
that 

when the Pharisees sought a " sign from heaven " Jesus said, " thtre shall no sign 
be given but the sign of Jonas," "^ . . . The sign of Jonas is that of the Oan 
or fishman of Nineveh. . . . Assuredly there was no other sign than that of 
the Sun reborn in Pisces. The voice of the Secret Wisdom says those who are 
looking for signs can have no other than that of the returning fish-man Ichthys, 
Oannes, or Jonas — who could not be made flesh. 

It would appear that Kepler maintained it as a positive fact that, at 
the moment of the " incarnation," all the planets were in conjunction 
in the sign of Pisces, called by the Jews (the Kabalists) the " constella- 
tion of the Messiah." " It is in this constellation," he averred, " that 
was placed the star of the Magi/' This statement, quoted by Dr. 
Sepp,**^* emboldened him to remark that "all the Jewish traditions 
while announcing that star, that many nations have seen," ( ! )*^^ added 
that '' it would absorb the seventy planets that preside over the destinies 
of various nations on this globe." **^* " In virtue of those natural pro- 
phecies," explains Dr. Sepp, " it was written in the stars of the firma- 
ment that the Messiah would be bom in the lunar year of the world 
4320, in that memorable year when the entire choir of the planets 
would be feasting its jubilee." 

There was indeed a rage, at the beginning of the present century, for 
claiming from the Hindus restoration of an alleged robbery from the 
Jews of their " gods," patriarchs, and chronology. It was Wilford who 
had recognized Noah in Prithi and in Satyavrata, Enos in Dhruva, 
and even Assur in Isvara. Yet, after being residents for so many years 
in India, some Orientalists, at least, ought to have known that it was 
not the Hindus alone who had these figures, or who had divided their 
great age into four minor ages. Nevertheless writers in the Asiatic 
Researches indulged in the most extravagant speculations. 

S. A. Mackey, the Norwich "philosopher, astronomer, and shoe- 
maker," argues very pertinently: 

Christian theologians think it their duty to write against the long periods of 



1040. Mati, xrL 4. 

1041. Vi4 dt Notre Seigntur Jisus Christ, 

VoL I. p. 9. 

1042. Whether many nations luTe teen 
that identical star, or not, we all know that 
the tepnlchers of "the three Magi/' who 
rejoice in the quite Teutonic names of Kas- 
par and Melchoir, Balthasar being the only 
exception, and the two haTing little of the 



Chaldarsn ring in them — are shown by tke 
priests in the famous cathedral of 
where the Magian bodies are not only 
posed, but firmly beliered to have been buried. 
1043. This tradition about tlie M«#iUy 
ptanets that preside over the destinies of na- 
tions, is based on the occult coaaogonkal 
teaching that besides our own septenary chain 
of world-planets, there are many more in Ike 
solar system. 



CHAU)AEO-JUOAKAN GODS 



655 



Hindu chronology. But when a man of learning crucifies the names and numbers 
of the ancients, and wrings and twists them into a form which means something 
quite foreign to the intention of the ancient authors; but which, so mutilated, 
fits in with the birth of some maggot pre-existing in his own brain with so much 
exactness that he pretends to be amazed at the discovery, I cannot think him 
quite so pardonable.*^ 

This is intended to apply to Captain (later Colonel) Wilford, but the 
words may fit more than one of our modem Orientalists. The former 
was the first to crown his unlucky speculations in Hindu chronology 
and the Puranas by connecting the 4,320,000 years with biblical chron- 
ology, simply dwarfing the figures to 4320 years (the supposed lunar 
year of the Nativity), and Dr. Sepp has simply plagiarized the idea 
from this gallant officer. Moreover, he persisted in seeing in them 
Jewish property, as well as a Christian prophecy, thus accusing the 
Aryans of having helped themselves to Semitic revelation, whereas it 
was the reverse. The Jews, moreover, need not be accused of despoil- 
ing the Hindiis, of whose figures Ezra probably knew nothing. They 
had evidently and undeniably borrowed them from the Chaldaeans, 
along with their gods. Of the 432,000 years of the Chaldaean divine 
Dynasties ^®*" they made 4320 lunar years from the world's creation to 
the Christian era ; as to the Babylonian and Egyptian Gods, they trans- 
formed them as quietly and modestly into Patriarchs. Every nation was 
more or less guilty of such refashioning and adaptation of a Pantheon 
(common once to all) of universal, into national, tribal gods and 
Heroes. It was their property in its new Pentateuchal garb, and no 
one of the Israelites has ever forced it upon any other nation — least 
of all upon Europeans. 

Without stopping to notice this very unscientific chronology more 
than is necessary, we may make a few remarks that may be found to the 



1044. Kgy of Urania, 

1045. Every scholar is aware, of course, 
that the Chaldaeans claimed the same figures 
(432) or (432.000) for their divine dynasties 
as the Hindus do for their Mah&yuga, namely, 
4,320,000. Therefore has Dr. Sepp, of Mun- 
ich, undertaken to support Kepler and Wil* 
ford in their charge that the Hindus had 
borrowed them from the Christians, and the 
Chaldaeans from the Jews, who, as claimed, 
expected their Messiah in the lunar year of 
the world 4320111 As these figures, according 
to ancient writers, were based by Berosus on 
the 120 Saroses — each of the divisions mean* 
ing six neroses of 600 years each, making a 
sum total of 432,000 years — they do not thus 
appear peremptory. But the pious professor 



of Munich undertook to explain them in ih* 
correct way. He claims to have solved the 
riddle by showing that the "saros being com- 
posed according to Pliny of 222 synodial 
months, to wit, 18 years 6/10," the calculator 
naturally fell back into the figures " given by 
Suidas," who affirmed that the 120 saroses 
made 2222 sacerdotal and cyclic years, which 
equalled 1656 solar years. (Vie dg Notrt 
Seigneur Jisus Christ, Vol. II, p. 417) 

Suidas said nothing of the kind, and, if he 
had, he would prove little, if anything, by it 
The neroses and saroses were the same thorn 
in the side of uninitiated ancient writers, as 
the apocalyptic 666 of the "great Beast" is 
in that of the modem, and they have found 
their unlucky Newtons at the latter figures 
have. 



656 I^HE SECRET DOCTRINE 

point. These figures of 4320 lunar years of the world (in the Bible the 
solar years are used) are not fanciful, as such, even if their application 
is quite erroneous ; for they are only the distorted echo of the primitive 
esoteric, and later on Brahmanical doctrine concerning the Yugas. A 
" Day " of Brahma equals 4,320,000,000 years, as also a " Night " of 
Brahma, or the duration of Pralaya, after which a new Sun rises 
triumphantly over a new manvantara, for the septenary chain it illum- 
inates. The teaching had penetrated into Palestine and Europe cen- 
turies before the Christian era,**^* and was present in the minds of the 
Mosaic Jews, who based upon it their small cycle, though it received 
full expression only through the Christian chronologers of the Bible, 
who adopted it, as also the 25th of December, the day on which all the 
solar gods were said to have been incarnated. What wonder, then, 
that the Messiah was made to be bom " the lunar year of the world 
4320 " ? The " Son of Righteousness and Salvation " had once more 
arisen and had dispelled pralayic darkness of chaos and non-being on 
the plane of our objective little globe and chain. Once the subject of 
the adoration was settled upon, it was easy to make the supposed events 
of his birth, life, and death, fit in with the Zodiacal exigencies and old 
traditions, though they had to be somewhat remodeled for the occasion. 
Thus what Kepler said, as a great astronomer, becomes comprehen> 
sible. He recognized the grand and universal importance of all such 
planetary conjunctions, " each of which " — as he has well said — "is 
a climacteric year of Humanity." **^^ The rare conjunction of Saturn, 
Jupiter, and Mars has its significance and importance on account of 
its certain great results — in India and China as much as it has in 
Europe for the respective mystics of all those countries. And it is 
certainly no better now than a mere assumption to maintain that nature 
had only Christ in view, when building her (to the profane) fantastic 
and meaningless constellations. If it is claimed that it was no hazard 
that could lead the archaic architects of the Zodiac, thousands of years 
ago, to mark with the asterisk (a) the figure of Taums, with no better 
or more valid proof of it being prophetic of the Verbum or Christ than 
that the aleph of Taurus means " the one " and the first, and that 
Christ was also the alpha or the one, then this " proof " may be shown 
strangely invalidated in more than one way. To begin with, the Zodiac 

1046. See liit Unveiled, II, 132. to ■piritual uniYersal changes Tbc Bvro- 

peant called erery 63rd year " the fraad ctf- 

1047. The reader has to bear in mind that macteric," and perhaps justly sup p o s ed those 
the phrase " climacteric year " has more than years to be the years produced by moltiply- 
the usual significanoe, when used by Occult- ing 7 into the odd numbers 3, 5, 7 and 9. 
ists and Mystics. It is not only a critical But seven is the real scale of nature, in 
period, dnrinff which some great change is Occultism, and 7 has to be mnltiptied la 
periodically expected, whether in human or ^te a different way and method, 
cosmic constitution, but it lilKwise pertains as yet to European aatioos. 



THB DRACON AND THE BUtt 657 

existed before the Christian era, at all events ; further, all the Sun-gods 
had been mystically connected with that constellation (Taurus) — 
Osiris, for instance — and were all called by their respective votaries 
" the First" Then the compilers of the mystical epithets given to the 
Christian Savior, were all more or less acquainted with the significance 
of the Zodiacal signs; and it is easier to suppose that they should 
have arranged their claims so as to answer the mystic signs, than that 
the latter should have shone as a prophecy for one portion of humanity, 
for millions of years, taking no heed of the numberless generations 
that had gone before, and those to be bom hereafter. We are told : 

It is not simple chance that has placed in certain spheres, on a throne, the 
head of that bull (Taun4s), trying to push away with the ansated cross on its 
horns, a Dragon; the more so, since this constellation of Taurus was called 
" the great city of God and the mother of revelations," and also " the interpreter 
of the divine voice" the Apis pads of Hermonthis, in Egypt, which (as the 
patristic fathers would assure the world) preferred oracles that referred to the 
birth of the Savior.*^ 

To this theological assumption there are several answers. Firstly, 
the ansated Egyptian cross, or iau, the Jaina cross, or Svastika, and the 
Christian cross have all the same meaning. Secondly, no peoples or 
nations except the Christians gave the significance to the Dragon that 
is given to it now. The serpent was the symbol of Wisdom ; and the 
Bull {Taurus) the symbol of physical or terrestrial generation. Thus 
the latter, pushing off the Dragon, or spiritual. Divine Wisdom, with 
the Tau, or Cross — which is esoterically " the foundation and frame- 
work of all construction " — would have an entirely phallic, physiologi- 
cal meaning, had it not still another significance unknown to our Biblical 
scholars and symbologists. At any rate, it shows no special reference 
to the Verbum of St. John, except, perhaps, in a general sense. The 
taurus (which, by the way, is no lamb, but a bull) was sacred in every 
Cosmogony, with the Hindus as with the Zoroastrians, with the Chal- 
dees as with the Egyptians. So much, every schoolboy knows. 

It may perhaps help to refresh the memory of our Theosophists by 
referring them to what was said of the Virgin and the Dragon, and the 
imiversality of periodical births and re-births of World-Saviors — solar 
gods — in /jw/®** with reference to certain passages in Revelations. 

In 1853, the savant known as Erard-MoUien read before the Institute 
of France a paper tending to prove the antiquity of the Indian Zodiac, 
in the signs of which were found the root and philosophy of all the most 
important religious festivals of that country, the origin of which relig- 
ious ceremonies goes back into the night of time at least 3000 b. c, as 
the lecturer tried to demonstrate. The Zodiac of the Hindus, he thought, 

1048. PntumatotogU, !▼, 71. 1049. Isis UnvtUtd, II, 490. 



658 THE SECRET DOCTKINE 

was far anterior to the Zodiac of the Greeks, and differed from it in 
some particulars vastly. In it one sees the Dragon on a tree, at the foot 
of which the "Virgin," Kanya-DurgA, one of the most ancient god- 
desses, is placed on a Hon dragging after him the solar car. He added : 

This is the reason why this Virgin Durgd is not the simple memento of an 
astronomical fact, but verily the most ancient divinity of the Indian Olympus. 
She is evidently the same of whom all the Sibylline books spoke, those works 
that have been the source of the inspiration of Virgil; the virgin whose return 
was prophesied as a sign of universal renovation. . . . And why [he added], 
when we see to this day, the months named after the ddty-names of this solar 
Zodiac by the Malayalim-speaking people of southern India — why should that 
people have abandoned their ancestral Zodiac to burden themselves with that of 
the Greeks? Everything proves, on the contrary, that these zodiacal figures have 
been transmitted to the Greeks by the Chaldees, who got them from the Brib- 
mans.' 



But all this is very poor testimony. Let us remember, however, also 
that which was said and accepted by the contemporaries of Volney, 
who, in his Ruins of Empires, p. 360, remarks that as Aries was in 
its fifteenth degree 1447 b. c, it follows that the first degree of " Libra " 
could not have coincided with the Vernal equinox more lately than 
15,194 years B.C., to which, if you add 1790 years since Christ, it 
appears that 16,984 years have elapsed since the origin of the Zodiac. 

Dr. Schlegel moreover, in his Uranographie Chinoise assigns to the 
Chinese Astronomical Sphere an antiquity of 18,000 years.**** 

Nevertheless, as opinions quoted without adequate proofs are of 
little avail, it may be more useful to turn to scientific evidence. 
M. Bailly, the famous French astronomer of the last century, Member 
of the Academy, etc., etc., asserts that the Hindu systems of astro- 
nomy are by far the oldest, and that from them the Egyptians, Greeks. 
Romans, and even the Jews derived their knowledge. In support of 
these views he says: — ***** 

" The astronomers who preceded the epoch 1491 are, first, the Alex- 
andrian Greeks ; Hipparchos, who flourished 125 years before our era, 
and Ptolemy, 260 years after Hipparchos. Following these were the 
Arabs, who revived the study of astronomy in the ninth century. These 
were succeeded by the Persians and the Tartars, to whom we owe the 
tables of Nassireddin in 1269, and those of Ulug-beg in 1437. Such 
is the succession of events in Asia as known prior to the Indian epoch 
1491. What, then, is an epoch? It is the observation of the longi- 
tude of a star at a given moment, the place in the sky where it was 

1050. See Rteu^a dt TAcodimU dt /fi- lOSla. Tr^U d€ rA ttr t m cmtt 
tcripHom, 1853. •* OritniaU, (1787). Dtoeoon 

1051. yi44 pp. 54, 196, #1 «#«. aire, pp. xx #1 seq. 



BAIIXY^S CONCLUSIONS 6S9 

seen, and which serves as a point of reference, a starting-point from 
which to calculate both the past and future positions of the star from 
its observed motion. But an epoch is useless tmless the motion of the 
star has been determined. A people, new to science and obliged to 
borrow a foreign astronomy, finds no difficulty in fixing an epoch, 
since the only observation needed is one which can be made at any 
moment But what it needs above all, what it is obliged to borrow, 
are those elements which depend on accurate determination, and which 
require continuous observation ; above all, those motions which depend 
on time, and which can only be accurately determined by centuries of 
observation. These motions, then, must be borrowed from a nation 
which has made such observations, and has behind it the labors of 
centuries. We conclude, therefore, that a new people will not borrow 
the epochs of an ancient one, without also borrowing from them the 
' average motions.' Starting from this principle we shall find that the 
Hindu epochs 1491 and 3102 could not have been derived from those 
of either Ptolemy or Ulug-beg. 

"There remains the supposition that the Hindus, comparing their 
observations in 1491 with those previously made by Ulug-beg and 
Ptolemy, used the intervals between these observations to determine 
the 'average motions.' The date of Ulug-beg is too recent for such 
a determination; while those of Ptolemy and Hipparchos were barely 
remote enough. But if the Hindu motions had been determined from 
these comparisons, the epochs would be connected together. Starting 
from the epochs of Ulug-beg and Ptolemy we should arrive at all 
those of the Hindus. But this is not the case. Hence foreign epochs 
were either unknown or useless to the Hindus.*®** 

"We may add to this another important consideration. When a 
nation is obliged to borrow from its neighbors the methods or the 
average motions of its astronomical tables, it has even greater need to 
borrow, besides these, the knowledge of the inequalities of the motions 
of the heavenly bodies, the motions of the apogee, of the nodes, and 
of the inclination of the ecliptic ; in short, all those elements the deter- 
mination of which requires the art of observing, some instrumental 
appliances, and great industry. All these astronomical elements, differ- 
ing more or less with the Greeks of Alexandria, the Arabs, the Persians 
and the Tartars, exhibit no resemblance whatever with those of the 
Hindus. The latter, therefore, borrowed nothing from their neigh- 
bors." 

Condensing Bailly's remarks, he comes to the following conclusions : 

" K the Hindus did not borrow their epoch, they must have possessed 

1052. For a detailed identific proof of thit conclntion, tee page 121 of Bf. Bailljr't 

work, where the nibject ii diamaaed teohnkally. 



660 ^HE SECRET DOCTKINE 

a real one of their own, based on their own observations ; and this must 
be either the epoch of the year 1491 after, or that of the year 3102 
before our era, the latter preceding by 4592 years the epoch 1491. We 
have to choose between these two epochs and to decide which of them 
is based on observation. But before stating the arguments which can 
and must decide the question, we may be permitted to make a few 
remarks to those who may be inclined to believe that it is modem 
observations and calculations which have enabled the Hindus to deter- 
mine the past positions of the heavenly bodies. It is far from easy to 
determine the celestial movements with sufficient accuracy to ascend 
the stream of time for 4592 years, and to describe the phenomena 
which must have occurred at that period. 

" We possess today excellent instrtmients ; exact observations have 
been made for some two or three centuries, which already permit us 
to calculate with considerable accuracy the average motions of the 
planets; we have the observations of the Chaldaeans, of Hipparchos 
and of Ptolemy, which, owing to their remoteness from the present 
time, permit us to fix these motions with greater certainty. Still we 
cannot undertake to represent with invariable accuracy the observations 
throughout the long period intervening between the Chaldaeans and 
ourselves ; and still less can we undertake to determine with exactitude 
events occurring 4592 years before our day, Cassini and Maier have 
each determined the secular motion of the moon, and they differ by 
3' 43". This difference would give rise in forty-six centuries to an 
uncertainty of nearly three degrees in the moon's place. Doubtless 
one of these determinations is more accurate than the other ; and it is 
for observations of very great antiquity to decide between them. But 
in very remote periods, where observations are lacking, it follows diat 
we are uncertain as to the phenomena. How, then, could the Hindus 
have calculated back from the year 1491 a. d. to the year 3102 before 
our era, if they were only recent students of astronomy? 

" The Orientals have never been what we are. However high an 
opinion of their knowledge we may form from the examination of their 
Astronomy, we cannot suppose them ever to have possessed that great 
array of instruments which distinguishes our modem observatories, and 
which is the product of simultaneous progress in various arts, nor could 
they have possessed that genius for discovery, which has hitherto 
seemed to belong exclusively to Europe, and which, supplying the place 
of time, causes the rapid progress of science and of human intelligence. 
If the Asiatics have been powerful, learned and wise, it is power and 
time which have produced their merit and success of all kinds. Pdwer 
has founded or destroyed their empires; now it has erected edifices 
imposing by their bulk, now it has reduced them to venerable ruins; 



THE BEGINNING OF KALI-YUGA 661 

and while these vicissitudes alternated with each other, patience accu- 
mulated knowledge; and prolonged experience produced wisdom. It 
is the antiquity of the nations of the East which has erected their 
scientific fame. 

" If the Hindus possessed in 1491 a knowledge of the heavenly mo- 
tions sufficiently accurate to enable them to calculate backwards for 4592 
years, it follows that they could only have obtained this knowledge from 
very ancient observations. To grant them such knowledge, while 
refusing them the observations from which it is derived, is to suppose 
an impossibility; it would be equivalent to assuming that at the outset 
of their career they had already reaped the harvest of time and ex- 
perience. While on the other hand, if their epoch of 3102 is assumed 
to be real, it would follow that the Hindus had simply kept pace with 
successive centuries down to the year 1491 of our era. Thus, time 
itself was their teacher; they knew the motions of the heavenly bodies 
during these periods, because they had seen them ; and the duration of 
the Hindu people on earth is the cause of the fidelity of its records and 
the accuracy of its calculations. 

" It would seem that the problem as to which of the two epochs of 
3102 and 1491 is the real one ought to be solved by one consideration, 
vie., that the ancients in general, and particularly the Hindus, calculated, 
and therefore observed, eclipses only." Says Bailly: — 

" Now, there was no eclipse of the sun at the moment of the epoch 
1491 ; and no eclipse of the moon either 14 days before or after that 
moment Therefore the epoch 1491 is not based on an observation. 
As regards the epoch 3102, the Brahmans of Tiruvalur place it at sun- 
rise on February 18th. The sun was then in the first point of the 
Zodiac according to its true longitude. The other tables show that at 
the preceding midnight the moon was in the same place, but according 
to its average longitude. The Brahmans tell us also that this first 
point, the origin of their Zodiac, was, in the year 3102, 54 degrees 
behind the equinox. It follows that the origin — the first point of 
their Zodiac — was therefore in the sixth degree of Aquarius. 

"There occurred, therefore, about this time and place an average 
conjunction; and indeed this conjunction is given in our best tables: 
Lacaille's for the stm and Maier's for the moon. There was no eclipse 
of the sun, the moon being too distant from her node; but fourteen 
days later, the moon having approached the node, must have been 
eclipsed. Maier's tables, used without correction for acceleration, give 
this eclipse; but they place it during the day when it could not have 
been observed in India. Cassini's tables give it as occurring at night, 
which shows that Maier's motions are too rapid for distant centuries, 
when the acceleration is not allowed for; and which also proves that 



662 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

in spite of the improvement of our knowledge we can still be uncertain 
as to the actual aspect of the heavens in past times. 

" Therefore we believe that as between the two Hindu epochs, the real 
one is the year 3102, because it was accompanied by an eclipse which 
could be observed, and which must have served to determine it This 
is a first proof of the truth of the longitudes assigned by the Hindus to 
the sun and moon at this instant; and this proof would perhaps be 
sufficient, were it not that this ancient determination becomes of the 
greatest importance for the verification of the motions of these bodies, 
and must therefore be borne out by every possible proof of its authen- 
ticity. 

" We notice, first, that the Hindus seem to have combined two epochs 
together into the year 3102. The Tiruvalur Brahmans reckon primarily 
from the first moment of the Kali-Yuga ; but they have a second epoch 
placed 2d. 3h. 32m. 30s. later. The latter is the true astronomical 
epoch, while the former seems to be a civil era. But if this epoch of 
the Kali-Yuga had no reality, and was the mere result of a calctUation, 
why should it be thus divided? Their calculated astronomical epoch 
would have become that of the Kali-Yuga, which would have been placed 
at the conjunction of the sun and the moon, as is the case with the 
epochs of the three other tables. They must have had some reason for 
distinguishing between the two ; and this reason can only be due to the 
circumstances and the time of the epoch ; which therefore could not be 
the result of calculation. This is not all ; starting from the solar epoch 
determined by the rising of the sun on February 18th, 3102, and tracing 
back events 2d. 3h. 32m. 30s., we come to 2h. 27m. 30s. a.m. of 
February 16th, which is the instant of the beginning of Kali-Yuga, It 
is curious that this age has not been made to commence at one of the 
four great divisions of the day. It might be suspected that the epoch 
should be midnight, and that the 2h. 27m. 30s. are a meridian correc- 
tion. But whatever may have been the reason for fixing on this 
moment, it is plain that were this epoch the result of calculation, it 
would have been just as easy to carry it back to midnight, so as to 
make the epoch correspond to one of the chief divisions of the day, 
instead of placing it at a moment fixed by the fraction of a day. 

" 2nd. The Hindus assert that at the first moment of Kali-Yuga there 
was a conjunction of all the planets; and their tables show this con- 
junction while ours indicate that it might actually have occurred. 
Jupiter and Mercury were in exactly the same degree of the ecliptic ; 
Mars being 8** and Saturn 17** distant from it. It follows that about 
this time, or some fourteen days after the commencement of Kali-Yuga, 
the Hindus saw four planets emerge successively from the Sun's rays ; 
first Saturn, then Mars, then Jupiter, and Mercury, and these planets 



THE EYE OF TAURUS 663 

appeared united in a somewhat small space. Although Venus was not 
among them, the taste for the marvelous caused it to be called a general 
conjunction of all the planets. The testimony of the Brahmans here 
coincides with that of our tables; and this evidence, the result of a 
tradition, must be founded on actual observation. 

"3rd. We may remark that this phenomenon was visible about a 
fortnight after the epoch, and exactly at the time when the eclipse of the 
moon must have been observed, which served to fix the epoch. The 
two observations mutually confirm each other ; and whoever made the 
one must have made the other also. 

" 4th. We may believe also that the Hindus made at the same time a 
determination of the place of the moon's node ; this seems indicated by 
their calculation. They give the longitude of this point of the lunar 
orbit for the time of tiieir epoch, and to this they add as a constant 
4(y, which is the node's motion in 12d. 14h. It is as if they stated 
that this determination was made 13 days after their epoch, and that 
to make it correspond to that epoch, we must add the 4(y through 
which the node has retrograded in the interval. 

" This observation is, therefore, of the same date as that of the lunar 
eclipse; thus giving three observations, which are mutually confirm- 
atory. 

" 5th. It appears from the description of the Hindti Zodiac given by 
M. le Gentil, that on it the places of the stars named "The Eye of 
Taurus " and the " Wheat-ear of Virgo," can be determined for the 
commencement of the Kali-Yuga. 

" Now, comparing these places with the actual positions, reduced by 
our precession of the equinoxes to the moment in question, we see that 
the point of origin of the Hindu Zodiac must lie between the fifth and 
sixth degree of Aquarius. The Brahmans, therefore, were right in 
ing it in the sixth degree of that sign, the more so since this small 
difference may be due to the proper motion of the stars which is un- 
known. 

" Thus it was yet another observation which guided the Hindus in this 
fairly accurate determination of the first point of their movable zodiac. 

" It does not seem possible to doubt the existence in antiquity of ob- 
servations of this date. The Persians say that four beautiful stars were 
placed as guardians at the four comers of the world. Now it so hap- 
pens that at the commencement of Kali-Yuga, 3000 or 3100 years before 
our era, the " Eye of the Bull " and the " Heart of the Scorpion " were 
exactly at the equinoctial points, while the " Heart of the Lion " and 
the " Southern Fish " were pretty near the solstitial points. An obser- 
vation of the rising of the Pleiades in the evening, seven days before 
the autumnal equinox, also belongs to the year 3000 before our era. 



662 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

in spite of the improvement of our knowledge we can still be uncertain 
as to the actual aspect of the heavens in past times. 

" Therefore we believe that as between the two Hindu epochs, the real 
one is the year 3102, because it was accompanied by an eclipse which 
could be observed, and which must have served to determine it This 
is a first proof of the truth of the longitudes assigned by the Hindus to 
the sun and moon at this instant; and this proof would perhaps be 
sufficient, were it not that this ancient determination becomes of the 
greatest importance for the verification of the motions of these bodies, 
and must therefore be borne out by every possible proof of its authen- 
ticity. 

" We notice, first, that the Hindus seem to have combined two epochs 
together into the year 3102. The Tiruvalur Brahmans reckon primarily 
from the first moment of the Kali-Yuga ; but they have a second epoch 
placed 2d. 3h. 32m. 30s. later. The latter is the true asfronomical 
epoch, while the former seems to be a civil era. But if this epoch of 
the Kali-Yuga had no reality, and was the mere result of a calculation, 
why should it be thus divided? Their calculated astronomical epoch 
would have become that of the Kali-Yuga, which would have been placed 
at the conjunction of the sun and the moon, as is the case with the 
epochs of the three other tables. They must have had some reason for 
distinguishing between the two ; and this reason can only be due to the 
circumstances and the time of the epoch ; which therefore could not be 
the result of calculation. This is not all ; starting from the solar epoch 
determined by the rising of the sun on February 18th, 3102, and tracing 
back events 2d. 3h. 32m. 30s., we come to 2h. 27m. 30s. a.m. of 
February 16th, which is the instant of the beginning of Kali-Yuga, It 
is curious that this age has not been made to commence at one of the 
four great divisions of the day. It might be suspected that the epoch 
should be midnight, and that the 2h. 27m. 30s. are a meridian correc- 
tion. But whatever may have been the reason for fixing on this 
moment, it is plain that were this epoch the result of calculation, it 
would have been just as easy to carry it back to midnight, so as to 
make the epoch correspond to one of the chief divisions of the day, 
instead of placing it at a moment fixed by the fraction of a day. 

" 2nd. The Hindus assert that at the first moment of Kali-Yuga there 
was a conjunction of all the planets; and their tables show this con- 
junction while ours indicate that it might actually have occurred. 
Jupiter and Mercury were in exactly the same degree of the ecliptic; 
Mars being 8** and Saturn 17** distant from it. It follows that about 
this time, or some fourteen days after the commencement of Kali-Yuga, 
the Hindus saw four planets emerge successively from the Sun's rays ; 
first Saturn, then Mars, then Jupiter, and Mercury, and these planets 



THE EYE OF TAURUS 663 

appeared tinited in a somewhat small space. Although Venus was not 
among them, the taste for the marvelous caused it to be called a general 
conjunction of all the planets. The testimony of the Brahmans here 
coincides with that of our tables; and this evidence, the result of a 
tradition, must be founded on actual observation. 

"3rd. We may remark that this phenomenon was visible about a 
fortnight after the epoch, and exactly at the time when the eclipse of the 
moon must have befen observed, which served to fix the epoch. The 
two observations mutually confirm each other ; and whoever made the 
one must have made the other also. 

" 4th. We may believe also that the Hindus made at the same time a 
determination of the place of the moon's node ; this seems indicated by 
their calculation. They give the longitude of this point of the lunar 
orbit for the time of tfieir epoch, and to this they add as a constant 
4(y, which is the node's motion in 12d. 14h. It is as if they stated 
that this determination was made 13 days after their epoch, and that 
to make it correspond to that epoch, we must add the 4(y through 
which the node has retrograded in the interval. 

" This observation is, therefore, of the same date as that of the lunar 
eclipse; thus giving three observations, which are mutually confirm- 
atory. 

" 5th. It appears from the description of the Hindu Zodiac given by 
M. le Gentil, that on it the places of the stars named "The Eye of 
Taurus " and the " Wheat-ear of Virgo," can be determined for the 
commencement of the Kali-Yuga. 

" Now, comparing these places with the actual positions, reduced by 
our precession of the equinoxes to the moment in question, we see that 
the point of origin of the Hindu Zodiac must lie between the fifth and 
sixth degree of Aquarius. The Brahmans, therefore, were right in 
ing it in the sixth degree of that sign, the more so since this small 
difference may be due to the proper motion of the stars which is tm- 
known. 

" Thus it was yet another observation which guided the Hindus in this 
fairly accurate determination of the first point of their movable zodiac. 

" It does not seem possible to doubt the existence in antiquity of ob- 
servations of this date. The Persians say that four beautiful stars were 
placed as guardians at the four comers of the world. Now it so hap- 
pens that at the commencement of Kali-Yuga, 3000 or 3100 years before 
our era, the " Eye of the Bull " and the " Heart of the Scorpion " were 
exactly at the equinoctial points, while the " Heart of the Lion " and 
the " Southern Fish " were pretty near the solstitial points. An obser- 
vation of the rising of the Pleiades in the evening, seven days before 
the autumnal equinox, also belongs to the year 3000 before our era. 



652 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

destiny was so indissolubly wound up with the Zodiac — how it is that 
after the loss of the ten tribes^ ten signs out of the twelve have not 
also miraculously disappeared from the sidereal fields? But this is 
of no great concern. Let us rather busy ourselves with the history 
of the Zodiac itself. 

Now the reader may be reminded of some opinions expressed on the 
subject by several of the highest authorities in Science. 

Newton believed that the invention of the Zodiac could be traced as 
far back as the expedition of the Argonauts; and Dulaure fixed its 
origin at 6500 years b. c, just 2496 years before the creation of the 
World according to the Bible chronology. 

Creuzer believes it very easy to show that most of the theogonies arc 
intimately connected with religious calendars, and point to the Zodiac 
as their prime origin — if not identical with the Zodiac known to us 
now, then something very analogous to it. He feels certain that the 
Zodiac and its mystic relations are at the bottom of all the mythologies, 
under one form or the other, and that it had existed in the old form 
for ages before; owing to some singular co-ordination of events, it 
was brought out in the present defined astronomical garb.*®** 

Whether " the genii of the planets " (our Dhyan Chohans of supra- 
mundane spheres) showed themselves to "holy prophets" or not, as 
claimed in the Dabistan, it would seem that great laymen and warriors 
were favored in the same way in days of old, when astrological magic 
and theophania went hand in hand in Chaldaea. For Xenophon, no 
ordinary man, narrates of Cyrus, that at the moment of his death that 
king was giving ardent thanks to gods and heroes, for having so often in- 
structed him themselves about the signs in heaven, h ovponocs ai|fic(ot«.**** 

Unless the science of the Zodiac is supposed to be of the highest anti- 
quity and universality, how account for its signs being traced in the old- 
est theogonies ? Laplace is said to have felt struck with amazement at 
the idea of the days of Mercury (Wednesday), Venus (Friday), 
Jupiter (Thursday), Saturn (Saturday), and others being related to 
the days of the week in the same order and with the same names in 
India as in Northern Europe. 

Try, if you can, with the present system of autochthonous civilizations, to 
much in fashion in our day, to explain how nations with no ancestry, no tradi- 
tions or birthplace in common, could have succeeded in inventing a land of 
celestial phantasmagoria, a veritable imbroglio of sidereal denominations, witboat 
sequence or object, having no figurative relation with the constellatiocis they 
represent, and still less, apparently, with the phases of our terrestrial life 
they are made to signify,*®"* 

10J«. Creti«er, Book HI, page 930. 1037. Cyropidie, "Ant da Zodiaqoe,* 

1038. PnfumotolofU, Vol IV, p. 61. 



TH« SIGN O^ JONAS 653 

had there not been a general intention and a universal cause and belief, 
at the root of all this. Most truly has Dupuis asserted the same: 
" II est impossible de decouvrir le moindre trait de ressemblance entre 
Ics parties du ciel et les figures que les astronomes y ont arbitrairement 
tracees, et de I'autre cot^, le hazard est impossible," he says.*®"* 

Most certainly chance is "impossible." There is no "chance" in 
Nature, wherein everything is mathematically co-ordinate and mutu- 
ally related in its units. " Chance," says Coleridge, " is but the pseudo- 
nym of God (or Nature), for those particular cases which He does 
not choose to subscribe openly with His sign manual." Replace the 
word " God " by that of Karma and it will become an Eastern axiom. 
Therefore, the sidereal "prophecies" of the zodiac, as they are called 
by Christian mystics, never point to any one particular event, however 
solemn and sacred it may be for some one portion of hiunanity, but to 
ever-recurrent, periodical laws in nature, understood but by the Initiates 
of the sidereal gods themselves. 

No occultist, no astrologer of Eastern birth, will ever agree with 
Christian mystics, or even with Kepler's mystical astronomy, his great 
science and erudition notwithstanding; simply because, if his premisses 
are quite correct, his deductions therefrom are one-sided and biased by 
Christian preconceptions. Where the latter finds a prophecy directly 
pointing at the Savior, other nations see a symbol of an eternal law 
decreed for the actual manvantara. Why see in the Pisces a direct 
reference to Christ — one of the several world-reformers, a Savior but 
for his direct followers, but only a great and glorious Initiate for all the 
rest — when that constellation shines as a symbol of all the past, pre- 
sent, and future Spiritual Saviors who dispense light and dispel mental 
darkness? Christian symbologists have tried to prove that it was that 
of Ephraim (Joseph's son), the elect of Jacob, that therefore, it was at 
the moment of the Sun entering into the sign of the Fish (Pisces) that 
" the Elect Messiah," the Ix^^ oi the first Christians, had to be bom. 
But, if Jesus of Nazareth was that Messiah — was he really bom at 
that "moment," or was he made to be so born by the adaptation of 
theologians, who sought only to make their preconceived ideas fit in 
with sidereal facts and popular belief? Everyone knows that the real 
time and year of the birth of Jesus are totally unknown. And it is the 
Jews, whose forefathers have made the word Dag signify both " fish " 
and " Messiah," who, during the forced development of their rabbin- 
ical language, are the first to deny this Christian claim. And what of 
the further facts that Brahmans also connect their "Messiah," the 
eternal Avatar Vishnu, with a fish and the Deluge, and that the Baby- 

1039. Origint dtt Culttt, " Zodiaque." 



/ 



668 ^HE SECRET DOCTRINE 

quity. However distorted and misunderstood the Hindu Sjonbology, 
no Occultist can fail to do it justice once that he knows something 
of the Secret Sciences ; nor will he turn away from their metaphysical 
and mystical interpretation of the Zodiac, even though the whole 
Pleiades of Royal Astronomical Societies rise in arms against their 
mathematical rendering of it. The descent and re-ascent of the Monad 
or Soul cannot be disconnected from the Zodiacal signs, and it looks 
more natural, in the sense of the fitness of things, to believe in a mys- 
terious sympathy between the metaphysical soul and the bright con- 
stellations, and in the influence of the latter on the former, than in the 
absurd notion that the creators of Heaven and Earth have placed in 
heaven the types of twelve vicious Jews. And if, as the author of The 
Gnostics asserts, the aim of all the Gnostic schools and the later Pla- 
tonists "was to accommodate the old faith to the influence of Buddhistic 
theosophy, the very essence of which was that the innumerable gods of 
the Hind^ mythology were but names for the Energies of the First 
Triad in its successive AVATARS or manifestations unto man," whi- 
ther can we turn to trace these theosophic ideas to their very root — 
better than to old Indian wisdom ? We say it again : archaic Occultism 
would remain incomprehensible to all, if it were rendered otherwise 
than through the more familiar channels of Buddhism and Hinduism. 
For the former is the emanation of the latter; and both are children 
of one mother — ancient Lemuro-Atlantean Wisdom. 



xvni 

SUMMARY OF THE MUTUAL POSITION 

The reader has had the whole case presented to him from both sides, 
and it remains with him to decide whether its summary stands in our 
favor or not. If there were such a thing as void, a vacuum in Nature, 
one would And it produced, according to a physical law, in the minds 
of helpless admirers of the " lights " of science, who pass their time 
in mutually destroying their teachings. If ever the theory that " two 
lights make darkness " found its application it is in this case, when one 
half of the " lights " imposes its Forces and " modes of motion " on 
the belief of the faithful, and the other half opposes the very existence 
of the same. " Ether, Matter, Energy " — the sacred hypostatical 
trinity, the three principles of the truly unknown God of Science, 
called by them Physical Nature! 

Theology is taken to task and ridiculed for believing in the union of 
three persons in one Godhead — one God as to substance, three persons 
as to individuality ; and we are laughed at for our belief in unproved 



THE EXACT SCIENCES OF — NEGATION 669 

and unprovable doctrines, in Angels and Devils, Gods and Spirits. 
And, indeed, that which made the Scientists win the day over Theology 
in the Great " Conflict between Religion and Science," was precisely 
the argument that neither the identity of that substance, nor the triple 
individuality claimed, after having been conceived, invented, and worked 
out in the depths of Theological Consciousness, could be proved by any 
Scientific inductive process of reasoning, least of all on the evidence 
of our senses. Religion must perish, it is said, because it teaches 
mysteries. Mystery is the negation of Common Sense, and Science 
repels it. According to Mr. T)mdall, metaphysics is fiction, like poetry. 
The man of Science takes nothing on trust; rejects ever)rthing that is 
not proven to him, while the Theologian accepts everything on blind 
faith. The Theosophist and the Occultist, who take nothing on trust, 
not even exact Science, the Spiritualist who denies dogma but believes 
in Spirits and in invisible but potential influences, all share in the same 
contempt. Very well, then; what we have to do now, is to examine 
for the last time whether exact Science does not act precisely in the 
same way as Theosophy, Spiritualism, and Theology do. 

In a work by Mr, S. Laing, considered a standard book on Science, 
Modem Science and Modem Thought, the author of which, accord- 
ing to the laudatory review of the Times, " exhibits with much power 
and effect the immense discoveries of Science, and its numerous vic- 
tories over old opinions, whenever they have the rashness to chal- 
lenge CONCLUSIONS WITH IT," one reads in chapter III, " On Matter," 
as follows: 

"What is the material universe composed of? ETHER, 
MATTER, ENERGY "... is the answer. 

We stop to ask, " What is Ether ? " And Mr. Laing answers in the 
name of Science : — 

"Ether is not actually known to us by any test of which the 
SENSES CAN TAKE COGNIZANCE, but is a sort of nuUhcmotical substance 
which WE ARE COMPELLED TO ASSUME in order to account for the phen- 
omena of light and heat," 

And what is matter? Do you know more about it than you do about 
the " hypothetical " agent. Ether ? 

" In perfect strictness, it is true thai chemical investigations can tell 
us . . . NOTHING DIRECTLY of the Composition of living matter, and . . . 
1/ is also in strictness true, that we know nothing about the compos- 
itions of ANY {material) body whatever as it is." *^" 

And Energy? Surely you can define the third person of the Trinity 
of your Material universe? 

1055. Ltc$ur0 on Protoplasm bj Mr* Huxley, 



670 the secret doctrine 

" The Energy is that which is only known to us by its ef- 
fects/' ^<^ 

Pray explain, for this is rather hazy. 

" In mechanics there is actual and potential energy : work 
actually performed, and the capacity for performing it. as to 

THE NATURE OF MOLECULAR EnERGY OR FORCES, THE VARIOUS PHENO- 
MENA WHICH BODIES PRESENT SHOW THAT THEIR MOLECULES ARE UN- 
DER THE INFLUENCE OF TWO CONTRARY FORCES — ONE WHICH TENDS 
TO BRING THEM TOGETHER, THE OTHER TO SEPARATE THEM. . . . ThE 
FIRST IS MOLECULAR ATTRACTION, THE SECOND FORCE IS DUE TO vis VWO, 
OR MOVING force/* . . .*^^ 

Just so: it is the nature of this moving force, the vis viva that wc 
want to know. What is it? 

" WE DO NOT KNOW I " is the invariable answer. " It is an 
EMPTY SHADOW OF MY IMAGINATION/' explains Mr. Huxley in his 
Physical Basis of Life. 

Thus the whole structure of Modem Science is built on a kind of 
" mathematical abstraction," on a Protean " Substance which eludes 
the senses" (du Bois-Re3rmond), and on effects, the shadowy and 
illusive will-o'-the-wisps of a something entirely unknown to and be- 
yond the reach of Science, "Self-moving" atoms! Self-nuwing Suns, 
planets, and stars! But who, then, or what are they all, if they arc 
self-endowed with motion? Why then should you, physicists, laugh 
and deride our " Self -moving ARCHAEUS"? Mystery is rejected 
and scorned by Science, and "MYSTERY is the fatality of Science,** 
as Father F61ix has truly said. . • . " Science cannot escape it ! " 
The language of the French preacher is ours, and we quote it in " Isis 
Unveiled," ^^* Who — he asks — who of you, men of Science: 

. . . has been able to penetrate the secret of the formation of a body, the 
generation of a single atom? What is there, I will not say at the center of a 
sun, but at the center of an atom? Who has sounded to the bottom the abyss 
in a grain of sand? The grain of sand, gentlemen, has been studied four 
thousand years by science, she has turned and returned it; she divides it and 
subdivides it; she torments it with her experiments; she vexes it with her 
questions to snatch from it the final word as to its secret constitution; she asks 
it, with an insatiable curiosity: "Shall I divide thee infinitesimally?'' Then 
suspended over this abyss, science hesitates, she stumbles, she feels dazzled, 
she becomes dizzy, and in despair says: / DO NOT KNOW, 

But if you are so fatally ignorant of the genesis and hidden nature of a 
grain of sand, how should you have an intuition as to the generation of a single 
living being? Whence in the living being does life come? Where does it com- 
mence? What is the life principle?*^ 

1056. Books on Pbytkt. 10S8. Vidt VoL I. 338-9. 

1057. Gimof • Pkytic$, 10S9. U Myst^g #f fo Seiemc€, Cbo- 



NO VOID POSSIBLE 671 

Do the men of science deny all these charges ? Not at all, for here 
is a confession of Tyndall, which shows how powerless is science, even 
over the world of matter. 

The first marshaling of the atoms, on which all subsequent action depends, 
baffles a keener power than that of the microscope. . . . Through pure excess 
of complexity, and long before observation can have any voice in the matter, 
the most highly trained intellect, the most refined and disciplined imagination, 
retires in bewilderment from the contemplation of the problem. We arc struck 
dumb by an astonishment which no microscope can relieve, doubting not only 
the power of our instrument, but even whether we ourselves possess the intel- 
lectual elements which will ever enable us to grapple with the ultimate structural 
energies of nature. 

How little is known of the material universe, indeed, has now been 
suspected for years, on the very admissions of these men of science 
themselves. And now there are some materialists who would even 
make away with Ether — or whatever Science calls the infinite Sub- 
stance, the noumenon of which the Buddhists call Svabhavat — as well 
as with atoms, too dangerous both on account of their ancient philo- 
sophical and their present Christian and theological associations. From 
the earliest philosophers whose records passed to posterity, down to 
our present age, which, if it denies " invisible Beings " in Space, can 
never be so insane as to deny a plenum of some sort — the fulness of 
the universe was an accepted belief. And what it was said to contain, 
one leams from Hermes Trismegistos (in Mrs. Kings ford's able ren- 
dering) — who is made to say : — 

Concerning the void ... my judgment is that it does not exist, that it never 
existed, and that it never will exist, for all the various parts of the universe are 
filled, as the earth also is complete and full of bodies, differing in quality and 
in form, having their species and their magnitude, one larger, one smaller, one 
solid, one tenuous. The larger . . . are easily perceived; the smaller . . . are 
difficult to apprehend, or altogether invisible. We know only of their existence 
by the sensation of feeling, wherefore many persons deny such entities to be 
bodies, and regard them as simply spaces^ but it is impossible there should be 
such spaces. For if indeed there should be anything outside the universe . . . 
then it would be a space occupied by intelligent beings analogous to its (the 
universe's) divinity. ... I speak of the genii, for I hold they dwell with us, 
and of the heroes who dwell above us, between the earth and the higher airs; 
wherein are neither clouds nor any tempest.*^ 

f^rences, Pire Filbc de Notre Dame; det nature at the imponderable energy of matter 

Motitaeaux: Hants, PfUn, Maiiqu4s. and modes of motion, and yet hold electricity 

1060. Behold the work of Cycles and their (for one) as being at atomic at matter itself 

periodical retnml Those who denied such — (Helmholtz). Inconsistency and contra- 

" Entities " (Forces) to be bodies, and called diction reign as much in official as in hetero- 

thero " spaces," were the prototypes of our dox Sdenoe. 

modem "Science-struck" public, and their 1061. The Virgin of tht World, page 

official teachers, who speak of the Forces of 84, 



672 THE SECRET DOCTRINE 

And we "hold" it too. Only, as already remarked, no Eastern 
Initiate would speak of spheres '*above us, between the eardi and the 
airs," even the highest, as there is no such division or measurement in 
occult speech, no "above" as no "below," but an eternal "within," 
Tvithin two other withins, or the planes of subjectivity merging grad^ 
ually into that of terrestrial objectivity — this being for man the last 
one, his own plane. This necessary explanation may be closed here by 
giving, in the words of Hermes, the belief on this particular point of 
the whole world of mystics: — 

There are many orders of the gods; and in all there b an intelligent part It 
is not to be supposed they do not come within the range of our senses; on the 
contrary, we perceive them, better even than those which are called visible. . . . 
There are then gods, superior to all appearances; after them come the gods 
whose principle is spiritual; these gods being sensible, in conformity with their 
double origin, manifest all things by a sensible nature, each of them ilhuninatsng 
his works one by another.**" The Supreme Being of Heaven, or of all that is 
comprehended under this name, is Zeus, for it is by Heaven that Zeus gives 
life to all things. The Supreme Being of the Sun is IJght, for it is by the disk 
of the Sun that we receive the benefit of the light The tldrty-six horoscopes 
of the fixed stars have for supreme Being or Prince, him whose name b Panto- 
morphos, or having all forms, because he gives divine forms to divers types. The 
seven planets, or wandering spheres, have for Supreme Spirits Fortune and 
Destiny, who uphold the eternal stability of the laws of nature throogfaout in- 
cessant transformation and perpetual agitation. The ether is the instrument or 
medium by which all is produced.*"* 

This is quite philosophical and in accordance with the spirit of 
Eastern esotericism: for all the Forces, such as Light, Heat, Elec- 
tricity, etc., etc., are called the " Gods " — esoterically. 

It must be so, since the esoteric teachings in Egypt and India were 
identical. And, therefore, the personification of Fohai synthesizing 
all the manifesting forces in nature is a legitimate result Moreover, 
as will be shown in the division that follows this one, the real and 
Occult forces in nature only now b^;in to be known — and even in this 
case, by heterodox, not orthodox. Science,**** though their existence, 
in one instance at any rate, is corroborated and certified to by an im- 
mense number of educated people and even by some official men of 
science. 

This sentence, moreover, in Stanza VI, "Fohat sets in motion the 
primordial World-germs, or the aggregation of Cosmic atoms and 
matter, some one way, some another, in the opposite direction" — 

1062. "Hcnnet here includes at godt the it ▼ery correctly. So does Baatem pidlo- 

stnsibU PorctM of nature, the elementa and aopby. 

the phenomena of the Univerae," remarka 1062a. Ibid., pagea 64, 65. 

Mra. A. Kingiford in a foot-note nrplalninf 1063. See alao | X, Tst Coanira tmn» 



THE ALIASES OF POHAT 673 

looks orthodox and Scientific enough. For there is, at all events, one 
fact in support of this position fully recognized by Science, and it is 
this. The meteoric showers (periodical in November and August) be- 
long to a system moving in an elliptical orbit around the Sun. The 
aphelion of this ring is 1732 millions of miles beyond the orbit of Nep- 
tune, its plane is inclined to the Earth's orbit at an angle of 64^ 3', and 
the direction of the meteoric swarm moving round this orbit is con- 
trary to that of the Earth's revolution. 

This fact, recognized only in 1833, shows it to be the modem re- 
discovery of what was very anciently known. Fohat turns with his 
two hands in contrary directions the "seed" and "the curds," or 
Cosmic matter; is turning, in clearer language, particles in a highly 
attenuated condition, and nebulae. 

Outside the boundaries of the solar system, it is other Suns, and 
especially the mysterious " central Sun " (the " Abode of the invisible 
deity " as some reverend gentlemen have called it) that determines the 
motion of bodies and their direction. That motion serves also to dif- 
ferentiate the homogeneous matter, round and between the several 
bodies, into elements and sub-elements unknown to our earth, which 
are regarded by modem Science as distinct individual elements, where- 
as they are merely temporary appearances, changing with every small 
cycle within the Manvantara, some Esoteric works calling them 
" Kalpic Masks." 

Foh<it is the key in Occultism which opens and imriddles the multi- 
form symbols and respective allegories in the so-called mythology of 
every nation ; demonstrating the wonderful philosophy and the deep in- 
sight into the mysteries of nature, in the Egyptian and Chaldaean as well 
as in the Aryan Religions. Fohat, shown in his tme character, proves 
how deeply versed were all those prehistoric nations in every science 
of nature, now called physical and chemical branches of natural philo- 
sophy. In India, Fohat is the scientific aspect of both Vishnu and 
Indra, the latter older and more important in the Rig Veda than his 
sectarian successor ; while in Egypt Fohat was known as Tum issued 
of Nut,*^* or Osiris in his character of a primordial god, creator of 
heaven and of beings.*^* For Tum is spoken of as the Protean god 
who generates other gods and gives himself the form he likes; the 
"master of life" "giving their vigor to the gods."*^* He is the 
overseer of the gods, and he " who creates spirits and gives them shape 

1064. "Oh Turn, Turn! iMucd from the negatiTe forces). See "Booh of th€ Dead/* 
ffrett (female) which is in the hosom of the III, and Egyptian Panihton, chapter ii. 

waters" (the great Deep or Space) ... iiwce c^ ^i..«».r »w« ** n^^h w #i.- 

"Thou, luminous through the two Lions" ^^?; ^ ^'«»**' *^» ^^^* ^^ '** 
(the dual Force or power of the two sotar 

eyos» or the electro-positiTe and the electro- 1066. Chapter badx. 



674 THK SECRW DOCTRINE 

and life"; he is "the north wind and the spirit of the west*'; and 
finally the " Setting Sun of Life," or the vital electric force that leaves 
the body at death, wherefore the defunct begs that Turn should give 
him the breath from his right nostril (positive electricity) that he 
might live in his second form. Both the hieroglyph, and the text of 
chapter Ixii in the "Book of the Dead," show the identity of Tum 
with Fohat. The former represents a man standing erect with the 
hieroglyph of the breaths in his hands. The latter says: — 

I open to the chief of An (Heliopolis), I am Tum. I cross the water spilt by 
Thoth-Hapi, the lord of the horizon, and am the divider of the earth, [Fohat 
divides Space, and with his Sons, the earth into seven zones] . . . 

... I cross the heavens, and am the two Lions. I am Ra, I am Aam, I ate 
my heir.*^. . . I glide on the soil of the field of Aanru^ given me by the 
master of limitless eternity. I am the germ of eternity. I am Tum, to whom 
eternity is accorded. . . . 

The very words used by Fohat in the Xlth Book, and the very titles 
given him. In the Egyptian Papyri the whole Cosmogony of the 
Secret Doctrine is found scattered about in isolated sentences, even in 
the "Book of the Dead," Ntunber seven is quite as much insisted 
upon and emphasized therein as in the Book of Dzyan, " The Great 
Water (the Deep or Chaos) is said to be seven cubits deep " — "cubits" 
standing here of course for divisions, zones, and principles. Therein, 
" in the great mother, all the Gods, and the seven great ones are 
bom." ^®** Both Fohat and Tum are addressed as the " Great ones of 
the Seven Magic Forces," who, " conquer the Serpent Apctp," or Matter. 

No student of occultism, however, ought to be betrayed, by the usual 
phraseology used in the translations of Hermetic Works, into believing 
that the ancient Egyptians or Greeks spoke of, and referred, monk- 
like, at every moment in conversation, to a Supreme Being, God, the 
" One Father and Creator of all," etc., as found on every page of such 
translations. No such thing indeed; and those texts are not the ofir 

1067. An image expressing the succession — otherwise they will rest in the lower fields; 
of divine functions, the substitution from one " and it represents also the seven successive 
form into another, or the correlation of for- Devachans, or lokae," In Amenti, one be- 
ces. Aam is the electro-positive force, de- comes pure spirit for the eternity (xxx, 4); 
vouring all others as Saturn devoured his while in Aanru " the soul of the spirit " or 
progeny. the defunct, is devoured each time by Uraeus 

— the Serpent, Son of the earth (in another 

1068. Aanru is in the domain of Osiris, sense the primordial vital principles in the 
a field divided into fourteen sections " sur- Stm), i. e. the Astral body of the deceased or 
rounded with an iron enclosure, within which the " Elementary " fades out and disappears 
grows the com of life seven cubits high," in the " Son of the earth," limited time. The 
the Kimaloka of the Egyptians. Those only soul quits the fields of Aanru and goes on 
of the dead, who know the names of the jani- earth under any shape it likes to assume, 
tors of the "seven halls," will be admitted (See chapter xdx, "Book of the Dead."} 
into Amenti for ever; i, e. those who have 1069. See chapter cviii, 4, " Book of the 
passed through the seven races of each round Dead " and Egyptian Pantheon. 



THE GODS OF EGYPT 675 

ginal Egyptian texts. They are Greek compilations, the earliest of 
which does not go beyond the early period of Neo-Platonism. No 
Hermetic work written by Egyptians*^® would speak of the one uni- 
versal God of the Monotheistic systems ; the one Absolute cause of all, 
was as unnamable and unpronounceable in the mind of the ancient 
philosopher of Eg)rpt, as it is for ever Unknowable in the conception 
of Mr. Herbert Spencer. As for the Egyptian in general, as M. Mas- 
pero well remarks, whenever he " arrived at the notion of divine Unity, 
the God One was never ' God,' simply." And Le Page Renouf very 
justly observed that the word Nuter, nuti, "god," had never ceased 
being a generic name with the Egyptians, nor has it ever become a 
personal pronoun. Every God was the " one living and unique God " 
with them. Their "monotheism was purely geographical. If the 
Eg)rptian of Memphis proclaimed the unity of Ptah to the exclusion 
of Ammon, the Thebeian Egyptian proclaimed the unity of Ammon to 
the exclusion of Ptah," as we see now done in India in the case of the 
Saivas and the Vaishnavas. 

Ra, the " One God " at Heliopolis is not the same as Osiris, the " One God ** 
at Abydos, and can be worshiped side by side with him, without being absorbed 
by his neighbor. The one god is but the god of the nome or the city, nuHr nuti, 
and does not exclude the existence of the one god of that town or of the neigh- 
boring nome. In short, whenever speaking of Egyptian Monotheism, one ought 
to speak of the Gods **One" of Egypt, and not of the one god."^ 

It is by this feature, pre-eminently Egyptian, that the authenticity 
of the various so-called Hermetic Books ought to be tested ; and it is 
totally absent from the Greek fragments known as such. This proves 
that a Greek Neo-Platonic, or even a Christian hand, had no small 
share in the editing of such works. Of course the fundamental philo- 
sophy is there, and in many a place — intact But the style has been 
altered and smoothed in a monotheistic direction, as much, if not 
more than that of the Hebrew Genesis in its Greek and Latin transla- 
tions. They may be Hermetic works, but not works written by either 
of the two Hermes — or rather, by Thoth (Hermes) the directing in- 
telligence of the Universe,*®^* or by Thoth, his terrestrial incarnation 
called Trismegistos, of the Rosetta stone. 

But all is doubt, negation, iconoclasm and brutal indifference, in 
our age of the hundred " isms " and no religion. Every idol is broken 
save the Golden Calf. 

Unfortunately, no nation or nations can escape their Karmic fate any 
more than units and individuals do. History itself is dealt with by the 
so-called historians as unscrupulously as legendary lore. For this, 

1070. Vii^ "Book of iho Dtad/* 1071. Matpero, in the Gnido au MnsU do Bouioq, 

1072. See chap, xchr, "Book of iho Dtad,'' 



676 THE SECR]^ DOCTRINE 

Augustin Thierry has made the amende honorable, if one may believe 
his biographers. He deplored the erroneous principle that made them 
all (the would'-be historiographers) lose their way, and each presume 
to correct tradition, " that vox populi which nine times out of ten is 
vox Dei " ; and he finally admitted that in legend alone rests real his- 
tory; for " legend," he adds, " is living tradition, and three times out 
of four it is truer than what we call ifistory." ***^* 

While Materialists deny everything in the universe, save matter, 
Archaeologists are trying to dwarf antiquity, and seek to destroy every 
claim to ancient Wisdom by tampering with Chronology. Our present- 
day Orientalists and Historical writers are to ancient History that 
which the white ants are to the buildings in India. More dangerous 
even than those Termites, the modem Archaeologists — the " author- 
ities " of the future in the matter of Universal History — are preparing 
for the History of past nations the fate of certain edifices in tropical 
countries : ** History will tumble down and break into atoms in the lap 
of the twentieth century, devoured to its foundations by her annalists,*' 
said Michelet. Very soon, indeed, under their combined eflforts, it 
will share the fate of those ruined cities in both Americas, which lie 
deeply buried under impassable virgin forests. Historical facts will 
remain as concealed from view by the inextricable jungles of modem 
hypotheses, denials and scepticism. But very happily actual History 
repeats herself, for she proceeds, like everything else, in cycles; and 
dead facts and events deliberately drowned in the sea of modem scep- 
ticism will ascend once more and reappear on the surface. . . . 

In our Book II, the very fact that a work with pretensions to philo- 
sophy, and which is an exposition of the most abstmse problems, has to 
be commenced by tracing the evolution of mankind from what are re- 
garded as supernatural beings — Spirits — will arouse the most male- 
volent criticism. Believers in, and the defenders of, the Secret Doc- 
trine, however, will have to bear the accusation of madness and worse, 
as philosophically as for long years already the writer has done. 
Whenever a Theosophist is taxed with insanity, he ought to reply 
by quoting from Montesquieu's Lettres Persanes. " By opening so 
freely their lunatic asyltmis to their supposed madmen, men only seek 
to assure each other that they are not themselves mad." 

1073. Rnme des Deux Mondet, 186S, pp. 157 and 158. 



End of Volume I 



J 



